[Speaker 3]
What's going on? Hey, what's going on?

[Speaker 2]
Can you hear me all right?

[Speaker 1]
100%.

[Speaker 2]
Solid, solid. We'll give everybody a minute or two to, you know, straggle in here.

[Speaker 1]
Do you have anything you want to pin into the room while you're setting up?

[Speaker 3]
Yeah, let me get that. Can you hear me still? Yep.

I don't know what the heck's going on with this stuff. Yeah, it's been a minute since I've done spaces.

[Speaker 2]
All right, I'm having some trouble. I'll figure it out. Yeah, I appreciate you being here.

We'll start off with, first and foremost, apologies about the heinous picture. You know, who was that guy? I'm not sure, but, you know, you can't rely on AI nowadays to do anything.

So my apologies on that.

[Speaker 1]
It's all good. I'm famous enough that AI knows who I am. I'm not famous enough that it doesn't know how I look.

[Speaker 2]
We'll get you there. We'll get you there. So here at the Blockchain Historical Society, we love history.

So this interview is going to kind of be primarily focused on the history around ERC-721. I've literally spent the past few days watching interviews. I read the whole GitHub of 721 from all the comments from when you joined until, you know, June of 2018 to just try to get as in-depth as I can.

So hopefully we can dive into some new topics and kind of bypass the standard interview questions you get. So I hope that's cool with you and we can do something a little bit different.

[Speaker 1]
Love it. I'm glad to hear. It's great that all this stuff is preserved in those comments.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah. It's tough, but it's important. I feel like, you know, where we can get to in the future at all, you know, you got to look at the past because you're doomed to make the same mistakes if you don't.

So everyone that's listening, thank you for coming in. Stick around to the end. We have a really awesome historical surprise that we're going to announce and give everybody an opportunity to.

So my first question has to do with, you know, the ERC-721. It was so profound. So many people love that, but many people don't really know the other extremely important process that came out of this standard.

And it was the decentralized process to passing a new standard on Ethereum.

[Speaker 5]
Thank you.

[Speaker 2]
The Ethereum Foundation wanted to take a hands-off approach. And so you really laid the groundwork to how the ETH community should come together to create a standard. Having very little experience with ETH at the time, how did you, like, navigate creating a process in an environment that was so new?

Did you think creating this process was going to, like, have such a profound effect on Ethereum and open source initiatives at the time? Or, like, how did that, you know, how did you see that coming about?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, man. So first, I was very inspired by the cats. I thought this was the first legitimate, not illegal use case of blockchain.

At this time, you have to remember, Bitcoin was used mostly, I'm going to, maybe, for fentanyl. You know, it was mostly used for drugs, if I can say that, or speculation. And so when I saw this wholesome cats, I knew that this was the era.

This is the beginning of blockchain. And I saw that and I said, you know what, this is going to be very hard. Because a lot of people that are in here are either straight techies or they really don't care about blockchain.

They're just trying to buy drugs or they're just trying to, you know, hold a coin. And I thought this is the beginning. So we're going to suck in a lot of interested people.

And there's going to be a lot of change required. Technically, technical is the smallest part of this, as you notice. But the change that's coming, we've got to get people on board with something that's new.

And I knew this was going to be real hard. So I thought this was going to be hard. This was going to require negotiating and being maybe savvy or, I don't like the word political, but like negotiating between a lot of different people that have feelings and egos and a lot of different ideas of where this is going to go.

And a big part of that was EF, for sure.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it's super interesting because like, you know, the standard beforehand with like the ERC20, it was, you know, there was just, you know, a handful of people that were working. And it was a community effort, but it was really come straight from the EF, Fabian, Alexandre, you know, Vitalik all had their hands in it. But this was a huge turning point into really, you know, the open source aspect of Ethereum when it comes to, you know, EIPs and anybody trying to, you know, develop something new on there.

So I don't think it's talked about enough how important you were in that process. And it's just crazy to see how it came from somebody that was so new, you know, to Ethereum. And it was just, it's just kind of shows that, you know, it's all about starting.

You know, anybody can just dip your feet in as long as you have, you know, you're encouraged, you have the initiative, you could really make a difference, you know. So that's what I really, you know, kudos to you for doing that. It was really awesome.

[Speaker 1]
Thank you. I love it. We can go into this angle.

So, like you said, ERC20 took two years to pass. It's mainly one function in one event, one main function, one main event. It took two years to get that through.

And I was benchmarking. I said, OK, well, it took them two years to do this. And what we're doing is a lot harder than that.

And it can't go that slow. So when I got into this, my commitment, the reason why an outsider, I had experience with open source and none with blockchain. But the reason that I got myself into the middle of this is really the one thing is I committed that you're going to get status updates for me.

And then I was going to push this. And I wasn't going to take no for an answer. I wasn't going to take no from all core devs, from Vitalik, from EF, from the, at the time, absent author of ERC721.

I forked it to ERC841. I wasn't going to take any no's. And we were going to move this together as a community.

And also, I gave everyone my phone number. So if you are in blockchain, if you're in NFTs in 2018, you know my cell phone. You can call me right now.

That was my commitment. I said, this is going to happen. And you're not going to get judgment or anything because you know more than me.

Right. So I need to, you know, don't feel like, don't feel stupid for asking questions. And that was a lot of it.

There's a lot of people afraid to feel stupid. Back in the day, we all felt afraid to feel stupid. And there was a lot that was going on that was not in the GitHub, in the comments.

So there's a lot of phone calls, just hearing opinions and getting that on board. Okay. So fully committed, had to get this done.

And the way I did it was I just, I just chewed it like an elephant. I cut it off. Number one, Solidity was not in a state where you could publish standards.

So Solidity was not expressive enough that you could make an interface. The interfaces of the day are not interfaces today. And so I just opened issues.

I opened issues and the Solidity team is amazing. They know a good issue when they see it and they work on it. And when I worked on 7.21, I assumed like this is an assertation. Like this isn't going to work unless all these bugs are fixed. And I just, I just asserted that they're going to get fixed. And every one of them got fixed.

There's one of them, the pure, the pure one. That one's a little close, but every other one, they got fixed. And now we have, we have the rails in order to make standards.

That was just one thing. Two, the standards themselves where the language used was not standard language. It was kind of like vibes.

Like I kind of do this with my code and you can kind of do that. That was unacceptable. I worked at Tripoli, I Tripoli.

Like when you make a standard, it's got to have cross compatibility, consumers, producers. So I introduced the RFC language of what the word shall and shall not and must do. Everybody uses that now.

On chain, there's just a bunch of little things like this that we need for standards. Because I know there's going to be a lot more standards coming after this. Now we're almost at five digits for new issues and pull requests.

And we got to be using clear language that's implementable, you know, to work. And then the biggest hurdle was none of the EIPs were getting passed. So every one of these had to be voted on by all core devs.

I have a lot of opinions on them. I don't even think there should be all core devs, period. I don't even think Ethereum should have developers.

I don't think Ethereum, I think Metallic should be retired by now. I think that is not, I think it's centralized. If Ethereum Foundation is paying for developers, that's my personal opinion.

But maybe an opinion that's less out there that more people agree with is, you can't have application standards held up by all core devs. That's unacceptable. That's not a community project.

I mean, I already think we're not a community project because they're proposing software changes. But you're definitely not a community project if you can't do standards without all core devs. And they get that, and they didn't want that.

And they kind of just want to do their programming anyway. And so we generated the two-week review. And so this was the mechanism that we community-fized the EIP process.

And I wholesale stole this idea from Apple. I was reading Swift. Swift is another language that is under heavy development.

Kind of came from Apple. It did come from Apple. And it was community-ized.

And the way they did it was kind of having this two-week process. Stole it. I just completely ripped it out and gave it to Ethereum.

It worked. And all core devs was like, yeah, we don't want to have meetings for all these token standards. And they knew there was going to be a floodgate coming.

So we don't want to discuss zero knowledge and stuff like that. Precompiles and gas costs. We don't want to discuss tokens and more tokens and metadata of tokens.

And, yeah, it was a good decision. It was a clean break. And now the rest is history.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, you're obviously touching up on some of my future questions. But, yeah, it's interesting you came across this Swift evolution process, was it? And the two weeks.

I thought the two weeks thing was really cool. And I got a few questions about that later. But we'll swing back into that.

In terms of, like, the early, you know, when you first joined in January 18th, I think it was. You. There were many hurdles with trying to unify everyone under this one standard because you had the 821.

And then you had like the zero X and a couple other companies trying to, you know, race to the finish line to get this standard. Obviously, it was probably for some reason of being the first, you know, monetary reasons, whatever it was. It was chaos.

But what, you know, or who do you think was the most difficult part of unifying that standard?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, so I'll lay it all out there. 821, I think that's the one with the centralized registry. That was a fundamentally different idea for this.

And this was the biggest threat to us having NFTs as we know them, because having a centralized and there's nothing wrong with that approach. I'm not saying it's a bad idea at all. That's that approach was kind of like having centralized permission tracking, kind of a registry of registries, which is totally different than what we landed on.

So if and CryptoKitties is already launched, so you can't forget the elephant in the room. That was CryptoKitties. So if you've got CryptoKitties here and then you've got projects that are copying them, copycats, and then you've got this other totally unrelated approach with a central registry.

I think it was like Digital Asset Registry, DAR. And that's going to double the effort of OpenSea, Rarebits back in the day, other marketplaces. And it would have bifurcated the entire development effort, which was unacceptable.

So for me, this is a big risk. If this happens and, you know, I can't stop him. He can't stop us.

This is a completely open proposal. But if this happens, it's not going to work. It took years to get, I don't even know if it works today, to get NFTs properly working in MetaMask.

Just MetaMask. And what I, and I'm biased, what I think the hottest application of blockchain is, doesn't even work great in MetaMask. So if it was going to take them five or maybe 10 years just to put the button in MetaMask, it's going to take them 20 years to get the other button.

Right. I knew this was going to take forever. So it's unacceptable this is going to take 20 years to land.

And it does take 10 years to land on freaking MetaMask. So that was the huge threat. Getting them on board, the team, the people behind that, and ultimately to withdraw their proposal.

That was it. That was the risk. And the way that I handled that was to call him on the phone, figure out what he wanted.

Does he want to work together? Why does he like that approach? And it's not that I don't like the approach.

It's not that one's better. It's just ultimately that one was different than, it was too different than CryptoKitties. That wasn't really the reason.

But when he withdrew that proposal, that was the biggest existential threat we had to NFTs, period. Other than that, we had Jacob Evans from Xerox Project, very on board, co-author on the paper. His name was right after mine until we had Dieter kind of preempted that.

But he was instrumental. He had great ideas. He had better ideas than me.

I even slowed him down. He absolutely could have done what I did. He could have had his name as lead co-author, not that it matters.

But also, he was just more busy than me, which is why he had Xerox, which is also very hot. So he's working on that. So really, for him, roped him in as co-author.

821 just had a nice heart-to-heart on the phone. You could not have that type of conversation on a GitHub issue because the ego's involved. And this approach is just as good as the one we're using, but we want to withdraw it.

You can't do that on a GitHub issue. There's too many friends watching. That's a really delicate thing.

That's what I brought to the table. My experience, I worked at Google. I worked on open source stuff.

I worked on this forever. Doing that the wrong way, you would not have NFTs today. Not that I'm the god for doing that.

Jacob could have done it. Dieter could have done it. Anybody could have done that.

And bringing Dieter on board. We had 841, which was what we now call 721. We kind of merged it back.

Getting that guy on board, he didn't know me. I didn't know him. He was kind of out of pocket.

He came up with the word NFT or published it first in the repository. Getting him to endorse us and what Jacob and I primarily were working on in the beginning, that was critical. Just for marketing reasons, calling it ERC-841 doesn't sound as good.

[Speaker 2]
It's funny you bring that up because it kind of leads into my next question. You were really gun-ho into this word deed. You liked the word deed.

You had some pushback there. I felt like deed was kind of your name baby for it a bit. It obviously came from a place that you had much bigger plans around authentication used for NFTs.

But you used two squares named after your wife to test this standard. It was a quick and easy implementation you kind of stated in past interviews. While different, it still kind of fell in the same line with NFTs you saw before with the digital collectibles.

Just, if you can, take me back inside the head of 2018, William. What did you really want to build there? I'm talking first idea.

You fell in love. You know it wasn't feasible. But just give me the dream.

2018, full descent. What was your dream there?

[Speaker 1]
I got you. It's going to be a letdown. This was a very tactical move.

I wasn't in love with the word deed as much as you might read. I'm glad you read it that way. Open Zeppelin contracts repo refused to rename it to deed as I was begging them to change it.

But there's very specifically something I was trying to do with this whole bitch fit I had over the word NFT and deed. Here's what it is. We were making the final changes on this thing.

We had it from Kips to Kitties, and we had other people that really wanted to launch today. And I could feel that. They didn't care what the standard was.

They wanted to launch. We were not ready to launch. In fact, you can see the most recent change we made.

I had a typo in Suseware's contract. That doesn't matter. But we had a minor change related to one of the events that we snuck in last minute.

That was an error on my part, and we had to make this change. And so I knew these changes were coming, these last minute changes. I knew we were not ready.

So what I needed to do was I needed to scare people into not launching until we were ready. This is the honest truth. So I didn't want people to launch draft NFTs based on the standard that wasn't going to work.

Because having these crypto kitties, that's the one exception because they came before the whole thing. But all these other people, if you remember back in the day with OpenSea and RareBits, what was happening is as the NFTs were launching, every single NFT had a different way it worked. And therefore, every single code in OpenSea worked differently.

There's no standard. So crypto kitties, there was code, and there was code for this, and there was code for that. If you wanted to get your NFT listed on OpenSea, you had to call them, you had to find a developer, and they had to write code hard-coded for your contract.

That was the reality in the late 2017, early 2018. And so I really wanted to just stop people. Please, don't launch this.

I promise you can call me on the phone. You can say I don't sleep. My wife is in the Philippines right now.

I'm on every time zone. I'm moving ASAP. But do not launch this until we all agree on this.

And I promise you I'm helping you and I'm not slowing you down. And every time I make a change, me personally, I'm paying a lot of gas to fix two squares. I've got skin in the game.

And so what better way to do that than to just muck with the whole name of the thing and call it Deeds? Because at that point, I don't feel like we've ever even fully decided on the name of the thing. So I didn't want to have it ossify into the word NFT because there was no discussion of the topic and nobody had time to think about it.

Now, we moved very fast. I think there was like a two-day vote, which is, I don't know. It was, trust me, everybody was online nonstop while this was working.

So two days was the proper speed for this. But we did have a vote or we had a consensus-building process. And we landed on NFT, which is fine.

And I'm happy we got there. But we got there with so much more legitimacy. And nobody's going to tell me, oh, you only picked NFT because that's what Dieter picked or that's this.

Nope, nope. I put the whole thing on the line. I pushed it as far out of that box as we could.

And that's where we ended up. I heard everybody's opinion. We had nonduples.

We had cubes. We had Latin letters. We had Greek words.

We had Hebrew words. We had title. We had every word you could come up with.

We tallied them. We considered every one of them. And so really what I wanted to do is give more legitimacy.

That's the whole point of this was to get so much legitimacy that I knew we're going to land. And then when we land, baby, there's no arguments. You had your chance.

We heard you. You called me. We talked it out.

I'm sorry. Is that a letdown?

[Speaker 2]
No, no. I mean, I feel like it hasn't really been talked about enough. So I'm glad that it's out there now.

It's interesting to see. It was almost like a little bit of a filibuster to make sure things were thought through. Yeah, that was great.

That's great. I'm happy with the answer. Now, you know, obviously, you know.

Hold on. I want to go back to this one thing. There was a function that you had spoke about and many others, you know, some liked it and many didn't.

It had to do with actually like approving an NFT in a two step transfer process. Do you remember that? So we we see so many scams today and wallet drainers and, you know, people making its way into people's holdings.

And then they approve it. And it drains their wallet. Knowing what you know today, do you think that function like could have been beneficial or would have just made it like usability too difficult?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, now you're getting breaking news here because I've never criticized any part of 721 just because I was afraid somebody would fork it. And then we would have that bifurcation. I think we're long beyond that.

And I'm glad to discuss this, especially with hindsight for future blockchains, because they don't need to use the standard. They can do whatever they want. So, yeah, I'll tell you everything.

Set approval that where you approve just one token. I thought that was going to be the primary mechanism because I thought there's going to be a lot more person to person transfers. Like I would approve it to you and you would take it.

That was misguided because I did not expect that marketplaces were going to run ninety nine point nine nine nine nine percent of the market. I didn't realize that. Then we had OpenSea.

I thought there was going to be a lot more atomic swaps and I missed the mark hard on that. Luckily, you don't have to use this function. But yeah, just paying twice for a transaction, paying once to approve it completely unacceptable.

So that was completely useless. The whole safe transfer thing where it checks the target contract to make sure it's a smart contract. Completely useless.

Never should have done that. I I've kept silence for enough years and I actually didn't like that in the beginning. But that was, let's say, a negotiating thing that had to get in there for this to pass.

So that's part of the sausage. Should have never had safe transfer. And luckily you don't need to use safe transfer.

So one of the people nameless whose opinion really counted and this would not have got done without them needed that. In fact, they wanted that to be the default only function. We successfully got it to pass with a safe transfer and a not safe transfer.

So, again, you're welcome to never use safe transfer. And I never do. Instead, the approach we should have used for that is to use off chain checking of the recipient, not on chain checking.

On chain checking is also vulnerable to gas theft and just completely unnecessary. But that should have totally been off chain. I don't know why I never thought of that.

Just check off chain. Have a different mechanism that works off chain. And the wallet should check before you send it that you're sending it somewhere appropriate.

That's totally how it should have worked. Complete bluff on my, you know, that all messed up. Set approval for all.

I cannot eat that. I think it's appropriate. I know people are revoking.

And that is the correct approach. I think set approval for all. We should have done that.

We did do it. Everybody uses it to connect their marketplaces. And you just can't get away from that.

You know, for fungible tokens, you can set a limit. For non-fungible, you kind of have to just give all your tokens. That really just makes sense.

The only other thing that's left, which I have so many phone calls and I wanted to get someone to sponsor me to work on this and standardize it. But there really should be an approve with signature or transfer with signature or something like that. Where you authorize the transaction specifically with an off-chain signature with EIP 712.

But just back in 2018, we could not have done that. 712 didn't really land fully. Couldn't do that.

But luckily you can do that as an extension. Metadata should have been a requirement, not as an extension. And enumeration, I'm sorry.

And luckily that was an extension, too. That's not baseline. You know, some markets, some chains, like Base or whatever, use enumeration.

And they really care about counting them. And another big mistake. Sorry.

The balance-off should not have been in there. That should have been in the enumeration. Balance-off should not have been part of the baseline standard.

It's too expensive. It wastes storage. Again, I thought it kind of makes it more you're familiar with the balance-off, right?

[Speaker 3]
Yes.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So that was kind of a holdover from ERC20. And it actually makes it sort of compatible.

If you remember using Etherscan like any time until recently, your 721 tokens showed up as ERC20s. And it's because of the balance-off. So the nice thing is that it allowed you to check if a token had any NFTs.

But, again, I was very misguided here because I thought more people would be using writing their own dApps or interacting directly with smart contracts. I missed the mark so hard. Everybody practically is using events.

Jacob told me this. He told me twice. I didn't listen.

I couldn't understand it. And everybody's using marketplaces and events, basically. And so we should not even need to ask the smart contract if somebody has tokens.

Yeah.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. No, that's really interesting. It's funny that you mentioned metadata because I do have a question on that later as well.

But in past interviews, you talk a bit about, like, how valuable the open-source collaboration process was for creating the ERC721. I know there were four main authors, you, Shirley, Evans, and Sax. But going through the GitHubs, there was 98 people on the 721 GitHub, 50 on the 841 GitHub.

If you could sneak in an honorary author who really contributed a lot, does any names come to mind? Give them flowers now if you can think of anybody.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, we'll send flowers. So I don't want to say his name wrong, but the gentleman from 821 with the Distributed Asset Registry provided key insights on all of this stuff. He was instrumental in teaching me a lot of these things and showing me how to argue technically for the approach that he had, even though that's not the one we went with.

We also had Cody. Cody gave me my first platform in Texas to present this stuff. He set up a great meeting.

He was not into the technical code. He's not a code author, but code is not always the most important things here. And he really opened my eyes to the different use cases that are out there.

And it was instrumental to me to understand that we can't just have this whole thing about pictures of animals, pictures with eyeballs. That's why I was really afraid. So that's why I took the time to go to SuSquares and make something that was different than CryptoKitties.

Even though nowadays, when I talk to my neighbors and friends, they only think of NFTs as pictures. And nowadays, we have this whole thing called real-world assets, which is really just nothing real about them. They're really just financial assets.

When we're ready to really talk about RWAs, it's like infrastructure, even mining rigs, but houses. Those are real world. They weren't getting butchered.

But that's really what I was thinking we're going to get to, and it took us a little longer to get there. But those are going to be NFTs. Those are not going to be fungible tokens.

The asset is a distinguishable asset. So he really helped me with that, and he helped me keep my eye on the long term. At the minute, I just wanted to standardize this around cats, and he really showed me that, guys, you need to think long term on this.

And we did. So I'm going to give two honorary mentions there, even though they did not write, I believe, any words actually in the spec itself.

[Speaker 2]
Nice, nice. Sometimes just being there and opening up the eyes to other people in terms of what the possibilities are with blockchain, that's all that matters. Because me, I can't write a lick of code, but I've helped people just see vision sometimes.

If we all did that, I think that's kind of what Satoshi would have wanted in terms of just opening people's eyes to the bigger possibilities. Even though the cyberpunk idealist is kind of getting a bit lost, but I still think it's important to always try to open people's eyes with this tech. So the last two-week call you talked about, early June seemed very chaotic.

Lots of developers throwing ideas left and right. What was that last two weeks like to you? How crazy was it?

And just give me some insight there.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, man. So we're laying the railroad tracks and we're driving the train on them. And the first thing I'm thinking as everything that we're doing is I don't want to mess up this process because NFTs are big.

This is going to start blockchain as we know it. But this two-week process is going to be bigger. So I want the full faith of this process.

I don't want to write a rule and then cop out on my own rule. So I want to make sure that if we're going to make an exception, we've got to really explain why we're making an exception. Because basically, I feel like I'm the Supreme Court here.

So I'm the legislator and I'm the Supreme Court judging myself. So I've got to really be honest with this stuff because I do not want to see a million standards. And we have a million standards today.

I don't want to see a million standards get finalized that are just crap and people publishing for the reason of publishing. I want to see, you know, people coming together, building stuff that's awesome and implementing the solar punk future, whatever, vision of the future. So I want to really have the best process and demonstrate it.

You know, if it's hard, I'll do it. Part of that for me is the two-week process was part of that for me, which ended on June 21st. And then the other half of that was me just redeploying two squares, which was a huge pain in the butt every time I made a change.

And I told people, look, because I'm apologizing to everybody, like all 80 people in there. I'm like, look, when I change something, when I merge a change, you know, I'm making your job harder. And if you already deployed this, you have to redeploy it, which really sucks.

We didn't have tooling back then. You had to click, click, click, click, click, click. And I'm like, look, I'll be the first one to do it.

So I lead by example. And I said, look, this sucks and it sucks for me, too. So it's not me telling you what to do.

It's me telling us what to do.

[Speaker 4]
And I did it first.

[Speaker 1]
And I sold a bunch of squares and I had to resell the squares. Huge pain. And yeah.

So for the two-week process, I stuck to it. I said it, you know, speak now or forever hold your peace. And it, by the grace of the, you know, the grace of the people above, it worked.

It just, it somehow turned all the good feelings we had and it turned all the camaraderie and arguments that we had. It turned it into consensus.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah.

[Speaker 1]
Like we've never seen before.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it was interesting because I was reading through it and there was a couple, like, I know you added the operator at the end, which was ended up being pretty important from what I understand. I mean, I'm not good with code. So, but it ended up being like a late change that you put in the timeline.

And there was this, there was a funny thing with the Viper language that kind of came up and the safe transfer from the extra byte and stuff, which seemed like such a kind of like a small thing. But like, what do you think about like this, those small changes, like, you know, even at the end and something that might not seem so big, like how important is that to like the collaboration process?

[Speaker 1]
I wanted to respect it. And maybe, maybe this was lack of sleep at this point, but I've really wanted everyone to love me. I wanted, I wanted to get rid of the thumbs down on our request.

[Speaker 5]
Yeah.

[Speaker 1]
And because I knew any one of these thumbs down, you got to respect these people. Any one of these can fork you. And if they fork this before it's hatched, you're not going to, it's not going to work.

It's not going to work if somebody forks this.

[Speaker 2]
You were playing politics a bit. It was, it was difficult back then for sure.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it was. And it was really a risk. I probably over, over read that risk.

I probably, I don't know if everybody wanted to fork this. So I don't know if, you know, OpenSea really wanted to open, run two different standards for this thing. But I was afraid that it was real to me in my mind at the time that this was going to get derailed.

And we were never going to have this, you know, maybe it was a sunk cost. I was like, I put so much into this. I really want this to happen.

I don't want to derail this because I didn't listen to someone. It's like the movie War Dogs. You know, you didn't pay that one guy in, who didn't pay the guy, the guy wrapping the guns?

You didn't pay this one guy and that's why you're in jail.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

No, that's. Yeah, it was. It's interesting to see because obviously people want to be the first to do things.

Armenia. Yeah. Armenia.

Yeah. The Chinese bullets. Yeah.

Yeah. No, it's, it's, it's interesting to, to just see how, you know, you kind of had to teeter and tip or toe around a little bit just to, to make sure that everybody was on board. It was just about, you know, Ethereum was, I mean, it had the CryptoKitty stuff and, you know, it was a lot more used, but it's still, you know, a critical part of, you know, you know, it surviving because, you know, there had, there really wasn't many altcoins that survived beyond Bitcoin.

I mean, Dogecoin was probably the best, you know, the best alternative in terms of things that survived up to, up until that point. So you just, you know, wanted to not fragment the community as much as you could. And I respect that.

So you talk about like always having to train, change two squares. So give me an estimate, an estimation of how many, how many two squares did you deploy?

[Speaker 1]
On mainnet, probably six or seven. I think I found all of them. And I think they're documented on the two squares project history page.

[Speaker 3]
Okay.

[Speaker 1]
And then plenty more on the, unfortunately, I think we, it was on Ropsten, but I think we've lost Ropsten. I don't think anybody saved that.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think, I think it might've got, yeah, it was shut down. And I don't think anybody has that anymore. But yeah, that's crazy that you, you had, you made six or seven on mainnet just to keep trying to adhere to the standard that was just ever changing.

That's, that's, that's crazy. So I'm down to my last few questions. I won't keep you too much longer.

I know you talk about, you know, reaching a consensus and the open collaboration. And we talked about this a bit more, you know, there's, I've seen in other interviews that you've, you would, you know, you would have changed a few things and we kind of talked about that a bit, but is there anything else on your mind that you would change then in 2018? And then today, what you know now, if you could add something that would maybe make it a lot better that you didn't think about then?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So I gave you the fullest before, and I've never said that before publicly. So, so you're welcome.

And then, but the new one, so that was the 28 changes, 2018 changes. I should have, if, if I had done a better job listening back then, that's I should've got all this back in the day. But for today it's signatures.

I think long-term we need to have gasless transactions. And the, the main thing that doesn't work with NFTs is you need to onboard. So I have like, okay, let's say somebody sends you a token.

Well, the, the transaction you need to do is you need to authorize that to the marketplace, otherwise you can't sell it.

[Speaker 5]
Right.

[Speaker 1]
So I think even that step is unnecessary. I think instead, all you need to do is do a message, a signature. And so you, you could, I would, I imagine, let's say, we're talking about Ethereum with which has gas costs.

I'm imagining you own an NFT in your account right now, and you've never made a transaction. Your nonce is zero. You have zero ETH.

You have nothing. Somebody sends you this token. Now you own this token, but obviously you can't make any transactions because you don't have any ETH.

I don't even want you to own ETH. I think ETH is outdated on the Ethereum network, Ethereum mainnet network. Instead you should just sign something.

And then when you sign it, you know, through the magic of gas, whatever, somebody else can transfer that. So let's say you're going to sell it. So you list it on a marketplace.

You, when you list it on a marketplace, you only have to do two things. You have to authorize the marketplace. That should be a signature.

And you need to authorize the listing. That's a signature. So in this whole thing, receiving an NFT, selling an NFT, using an NFT, zero gas, never use gas.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah. And they're trying to do something with like the sponsoring of transactions, which is kind of cool, but not, not as in-depth as what you're talking about right now.

Right.

[Speaker 1]
It's cool, but it's dumb because first of all, it's dumb because Ethereum should not need to change. Bitcoin doesn't need to change. Ethereum doesn't need to change.

And the whole, the fact that it's even changeable, I think that it raises some questions about the legality of the whole thing. And, you know, there's a whole, a whole bunch of problems with that, but yeah. So maybe they'll change the way signatures work, which I'm very far against, but you can just solve this the application layer for new tokens only and wrapped tokens, but you just add the signature mechanism.

And the only people that need to sign the messages are the relayers. So you just, you receive it, that, that would be so much better. But guess what?

You don't need to go through KYC. You don't need to get tokens into your, you don't need to have Ether in account. You just have things, non-financial things, meme tokens that are not financial.

You could be participating in this whole thing. Never have Ether in your account. Most people shouldn't have Ether.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. No, it definitely is a barrier to entry that is, yeah, that we need to get over just to, for mass adoption and things like that. So one of the things you talk about, you said at some point in GitHub, you said at some point, somebody needs to be the authoritative on what is the metadata.

So how do you think handling of metadata has progressed today? Are you happy with it? You know, the majority of the way metadata is stored, you know, what is your thoughts on that?

[Speaker 1]
I'm really happy with it. Sometimes metadata has just got to be a URL. The metadata, like, again, we're imagining houses.

We're imagining this and that. It's going to be managed by a third party. And guess what?

In the real world, Entrika's law, you know, if somebody else has custody of it and you think you own it, then you need to trust the custodian. Okay. So what does that mean for URLs and metadata?

Well, if you think you own some house because some NFT says you own it, well, guess what? Your ownership in that house is only as valid as the lien, you know, the lien and the registration in your local district. If you're in the U.S., it would be your county. Your ownership of the house has nothing to do with the blockchain, and it has a lot more to do with the people that have guns in your, you know, police or the military. A concept of ownership is much more complex than just having a token on a blockchain. So recognizing that, you need to link to external systems.

You can't just have something on IPFS if it doesn't make sense at all. So you need to link to a local county that is authoritative for preventing people from breaking into your house because they have police with guns. That's a form of ownership.

You think you own your house? You don't own your house. You own a piece of paper that has a title.

Again, this is in the U.S. You have a title for your house, which the bank also has a lien on, which the police enforce if you pay your taxes. That whole messy situation, that's better recognized by a URL because that's kind of mutable, too. If you don't pay your taxes, you don't, you know, you don't own the house as much as you think you do because they might repossess it.

Right. So if they repossess your house because you don't pay taxes, you know, your deed that's on an IPFS image that's linked from the blockchain means nothing. So mutability, you can't be afraid of mutability, especially for real, real-world assets.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Which seems to be the real use case that you're really hoping and waiting for everything to fall into place, but it's definitely taking a bit.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, we'll get there.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah.

[Speaker 1]
But just for like on-chain stuff, I'm very happy that we had it work with data URIs. So we specified it as a URI. You can use data URIs.

This was intentional. And so I think there's just that now we could have done a, you know, we could have done a separate image URL versus a metadata URL. We could have done that.

There's no integrity for the thing. So if you're linking to like a public URL and the thing changes, I think, I think a famous artist sold something and then they changed the picture to a poop. You know, we could prevent that.

I have an ERC open for that, like a metadata integrity mechanism.

[Speaker 5]
Mm-hmm. That's cool.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I don't know. I mean, you can't say that mutable is good and you can't say that mutable is bad. It's whatever's appropriate.

And we support both.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. It's a double-edged sword.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I mean, it's flexible enough. Now, the metadata itself, so we do have some specifics on what needs to be in the metadata. And it's a very loose meaning.

So I'm not telling you what needs to be in there, but we are telling you that if you put something in there, then this is how it shall be understood. Yeah. So if you are to put, if you're to put an object and the object contains an image, then we are to understand that that image represents a picture of the thing.

Right. So, but we're not telling you you need to have an image. That's not a requirement, but if you use one, you know, the consumers are expected to get that.

Technically, this is the correct way to do it. It was, you know, there's a JSON schema in there. We're the first one to do that.

I think everybody uses JSON schemas now for, you know, ERCs, but I think it was done the right way. And, you know, for the image, I stole the image specifications from Instagram. So we needed to make a decision, you know, do we want, we're going to allow people to upload images.

Is there a size? Is there, you know, an image format requirement? Should we make everybody use SVGs or PNGs?

No. Should we, thinking of OpenSea, should we allow somebody to make an image that's a thousand wide and one tall, you know? Yes.

Should we encourage people not to do that? Yes. Well, what, what ratios should we encourage?

So now, you know, you're going down rabbit holes, but these things are important because if, if you've got a bunch of images that are totally different, then the marketplace is going to look stupid. So I'm, I'm, I'm putting on my hat as OpenSea thinking, okay, I'm OpenSea. How would I like these things to come in?

And I'll tell you, I'm not an expert on images, but Instagram is. So I just stole their ratio requirements and their, you know, image aspect ratios. I just shoved it in there and I cited it.

And I said, look, these guys look pretty smart. The team over there knows what they're doing for good usable systems. And we're going to recommend that you do that.

We're not going to require it, but you know, yeah. Recommendations are.

[Speaker 2]
I mean, it's, it comes back to the open source part. You know, they, they did it. They have a good standard working.

That's why we build off of it. You know? Yeah.

I think that, you know, you really approach this really well. I'm glad we dove into these things. So last two questions, we're going to go about the future.

Nothing crazy. Where do you see the future of NFTs heading in the next five years? Are there any projects out there that are doing something very unique or valuable that we should keep an eye on?

[Speaker 1]
Yep. So disclosure, this was a project I worked on and I have some tokens there, I think. So Breitling watches, you buy a watch, you get an NFT.

They don't even call them NFTs. They just call them certificates of authenticity.

[Speaker 3]
Right.

[Speaker 1]
So I think that makes a lot of sense. And I think we're going to see NFTs used in more places that are not even on the blockchain. My definite NFT goes actually back 500 years.

So I try to carefully say NFTs on the blockchain, or if we have that understanding, but the, the NFT, the word NFT, a non fungible and a token really goes back to when scribes were around in England, the first non-governmental entity that could allow transfer of assets. So those are kind of like notaries or notaries public. And so I consider those as those are NFTs.

They're not digital, but they are NFTs. So I think NFT-ifying things will get more exciting because QR codes are getting more exciting. So I'll give you the biggest use case that's coming.

And it is the UPC code, the linear code on the back of things that you buy retail. When you buy something retail, if you have a bottle of water in your hand, me, I'm in the U.S. So it has a 12 digit number on the back and it's, I have Poland spring water, and it's got a little code there. And the code is used so that when you buy it, they know what to charge you.

Now, this code is getting replaced this year. It actually came out 50 years ago. The first one I think was double mint gum or something like that.

Wrigley's gum. And yeah, they're going to replace these little UPCs with QR codes. Now, the QR codes are exciting because the density, you have more density.

And so now when you buy things, you can actually track the serial numbers for better and for worse. Privacy be damned. So as you buy things, the serial number can be printed on them on the outside label.

Now there's cost to printing and, you know, it's going to take us years for manufacturers to adopt the standard, but the new standard is written and it does replace the old one. So you will see this, and this is everything you buy can now have serial numbers on the outside. Again, do people actually implement the standard?

Who knows. But this has a major benefit for things such as goods that you buy on Amazon that can be fake. That problem is solved.

When you buy things, you just print the serial number and you track it through the supply chain and you prevent fraud or you find fraud. Very valuable. I was studying the drug industry.

There's a lot of fake drugs. There's so many fake drugs that you would not go to your local pharmacy if you knew how many people died from fake drugs. It is scary.

And there is a conspiracy to hide that because they just want you to buy drugs and they don't want you to know how bad the supply chain is. But that problem is immediately solved with serial numbers. You just, at the time you manufacture it, you give each pill or box or whatever retail package a serial number.

You print it. Printing is expensive. We're working on that.

And then it goes through the supply chain and you're not getting fake drugs anymore. Any prescription or non-prescription over the counter. Now, that really is real-world assets.

And everything you buy that has a serial number, that has a UPC, will have a serial number. So that's super exciting. Long-term.

It's already in the works. GS1 already signed off on the new standards. GS1 is the one who specifies how these barcodes get printed or the linear codes.

[Speaker 4]
And really exciting.

[Speaker 1]
Oh, and the best part is these new standards for these new QR codes actually work with blockchain. They're compatible. So there's a very fancy way, very forward-thinking, you know, they write these things for 50 years, where when you scan a package, a bottle of water or whatever, it can actually connect to a decentralized IPFS or something that actually pulls up information about that product.

And these things are going to last long-term because they can be on IPFS. There's a very special way that they do URLs for these things. And I can't even articulate it well here.

But they're really doing forward-thinking stuff, and it ties directly into stuff you buy.

[Speaker 4]
Everything you buy. So there you go. I can't hear you if you're talking.

[Speaker 1]
But it gets really exciting because, you know, the biggest thing about NFT is it's not on blockchain. It's just in the real world. It's just putting serial numbers on things and then encoding that into a little QR code that, you know, that is the basis of commerce in most of the world.

Hey, what's up, AG? You are a co-host. Are you able to – oh, you lost co-host.

I'm just a speaker. What's up, on-chain? Nobody here has hosting abilities.

How is this room working? Does anybody have their hand up to speak? Oh, there you go.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah.

[Speaker 1]
Can you hear me now?

[Speaker 2]
Okay. Well, we're good. We're good.

Last question now. So I appreciate you. We went a little bit over what we scheduled.

But I thought this was a really, really great interview. We touched up on a lot of things. I feel like other people didn't talk about with you, so I'm glad that we got to do this.

You know, it was really awesome. I appreciate your time. So what's next for William and Trekkin in the NFT space, in life, in whatever, man?

Just tell me what's next for you.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So for me, I'm looking for opportunities. I'm looking for projects to work with.

I do advisory. So in the past, I've always worked with a big project, come in, really promising stuff. We've got a former client, Daniel, on the line, worked on COVID certificates, on-chain, successfully deployed it in Mexico.

I mean, just really great projects. And I'm blessed that people call me and I get into this. But I'm looking for referrals.

So I'm looking for the future projects to get into. NFTs is not my first hat. It's not my last hat.

And I'm really looking for inspiration. So I want to know, what should I be out there on? What are the growth projects?

Now, in the immediate future, I can tell you that the exciting stuff has to do with the stock market and blockchain. That is a really ripe place to go mess some stuff up. If you bought a taxi medallion at its peak for half a million dollars in New York City and Uber is coming out, that is a ripe time to just get messed up.

That's what it's like in the stock market. Even in the stock market right now, you think you're buying stocks and you're not paying commission. Well, how are they providing the service if you're not paying a commission?

There's money going other directions. That whole thing is going to go upside down. Stocks and that whole market is very ripe.

Stablecoins is about the dumbest thing you could own right now because they can't pay you interest. And they just wrote a law that they can't pay you interest. So it's kind of artificially keeping the value down for stablecoins.

Why own a stablecoin if you could just put that money in a bank and own interest? If you take your stablecoin out of your wallet, you're not paying tax on it. It's a one-to-one conversion.

Really, the only benefit of stablecoins right now is money laundering or very temporary parking of on-chain assets. Superstate, a friend of mine, tokenizing treasuries. And if you are able to pay interest on them, that's not the future.

That's what you need right now. Stablecoins made a lot of sense in 2020 when interest rates in the government markets were negative. Germany had negative interest rates.

Zero interest sounds great when Germany's giving you negative interest rates on the buns. So that was a great time to take off stablecoins. But all the suckers who have their money in stablecoins now, sorry, you're missing out on percentages, points of interest.

And you could do anything with that money than not being a stablecoin. So stocks are great. Bonds are great.

Just immediately in the future. So immediately in the future, I got you a thesis. But for me personally, the future has yet to be written.

[Speaker 2]
I'm looking for feedback. Awesome, man. I really appreciate you talking about the history here.

I think it was great. I think we learned some stuff. Hey, we did get some exclusive info about what you would have done and what you would have took out and what you would have added.

I think that's valuable, and that just helps with the story. And that needs to be documented, and that's what I'm trying to do. So I appreciate you.

I'll never post a picture of you again that you don't give me authorization for. And, yeah, man, thank you. I really appreciate you jumping on and going a little bit over.

[Speaker 1]
Thank you. I appreciate you. I appreciate you coming in with all this research.

I can definitely see you've done your homework in a lot of dimensions here. You've got a good group here showing up, and, yeah, I'm going to stay tuned.

[Speaker 2]
Don't delete this recording.

[Speaker 1]
Man, there's a lot.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, no, I'm definitely going to. We're going to definitely save it. So I appreciate you.

You can hop off or whatever. I'm going to make a few announcements. But, yeah, thanks, man.

Have a good day. Cool. Cheers.

All right, everybody. Thanks. Thanks for listening.

I thought we learned some really, really awesome stuff here. I posted. So we got a little announcement.

Next month, the Blockchain Historical Society will be bringing an asset to market from 2015, whose code was authored by Vitalik Buterin. It's a one-of-a-kind token. None other like it.

And for everyone in this space, you have early access. You have an opportunity to receive an airdrop. So join the Discord link I posted from my account underneath this spaces.

I will delete it in 30 minutes. You'll get an OG role. So, yeah, go and do that.

You got an opportunity there. And we're looking happy to build. This is not going to be the same type of, you know, historical asset where, you know, we just allow it to be trade.

We're going to do some fun stuff with it. We're going to help foster future Ethereum initiatives. We got some cool partners lined up.

It's going to be a really awesome time. So thanks to everybody for, you know, checking in and listening to what we got going here. I appreciate it.

And, yeah, that link will stay up for 30 minutes. Have a good day, everybody. Looking forward to seeing you.