[Speaker 2]
Welcome guys, welcome, welcome. Just waiting for Fabian to get on here. Let me know if you guys have any questions or want to come up and be a part of the panel.

Trying to play some music and playing. Oh, there he is.

[Speaker 3]
Okay.

[Speaker 2]
Hi Fabian, how are you?

[Speaker 1]
Hello.

[Speaker 2]
How are you doing?

[Speaker 1]
Good. I mean, good under the circumstances.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, there's always interesting stuff going on in this space. It's good to finally meet you. I tried to actually come to the booth in East Denver and I just missed you.

I actually met a brew. I think a brew. Very nice lady.

And I kept calling you Fabian, Fabian, Fabian. She's like, that's not how you say his name. It's Fabian.

It's Fabian. I was like, I'm just an American. Sorry.

But yeah, it's great. It's great to finally link up and talk a bit about just you and the past and in a little bit of the future. I got a bunch of questions about you in general and then the early days of Ethereum.

And then we'll probably wrap up with a nice chunk of what you're doing now with Luxo and the universal profiles. If that's all cool with you. Sure.

Yeah. So really, I just wanted to just kind of get an idea of like, when did you actually start developing and when and like how and why you got into blockchain?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah. I mean, I started developing when I was quite young. So I started with like seven.

I had my first computer. We got my father's old computer. I think it was a 286 PC.

And I mean, I was basically always more interested in making the games work. You know, in the past, you had to configure the config system, the out exit path to get games running. And that was always like interesting.

And then once I had it running, I played it for five minutes and I was bored. And then I went on to get the next game running. Yeah.

And then I mean, I've basically been, you know, web designing since pretty much 14. I mean, I started with the first websites that I created for, you know, some people in my village. They had the company and in the 90s, they all wanted to, you know, I mean, they realized they have to have a website now, blah, blah, blah.

And then they heard that I could make websites. And then that's how I started. And over my early kind of web developer career, I just made lots of websites.

And I built a content management system, which is my username, in fact. So if you go to find dura.org, you actually still find my content management system that I built in the 2000, I think 2005 to 2008. And it's kind of how I got like all into coding.

There was always like my private life and my hobby. And I studied media design. Funny enough that it was not coding.

That was basically everything else from, you know, movie making to audio to graphic design and whatnot. Yeah, so this is how I got into, you know, the coding itself. And in 2013, I heard about Bitcoin through one of these, you know, random posts that you see on the website, where it says, you know, every every time these like mixi media posts you see on websites where you think this is total scam.

It said something about a Canadian wants to sell house in Bitcoin. And I thought, okay, what is Bitcoin? If somebody wants to sell his house in something I've never heard, let me click on that.

So that was March 2013. And that was the beginning of the rabbit hole of blockchain for me. So basically, I literally realized, okay, that's kind of like a crazy idea, like a cryptographic money.

It's decentralized. And all of this was completely novel concepts at the time. And I just kind of instantly got a feeling that this was a very big deal.

And then over the year 2013, I kind of like, we tried to conceptualize, understand how Bitcoin works. And you know, that concept was quite novel, in terms of decentralized infrastructure. I mean, I already built websites, and I knew how servers run and how everything else works on the computer.

But you always had to have a central place where, you know, logic is processed. And there's either it's a computer or it's a server, or something needs to, you know, decide how this stuff has to work. And here, the idea was that you have this like distributed computer network, and somehow they agree to what the system does.

And it took me quite a while actually to do. I mean, within the year 2013, I really thought every month that I kind of understood it now. And I had always these revelation moments where I thought, ah, this is, that's how it works.

But I had this like probably 12 times in this year. And every time again, I felt like and now I get it. But yeah, I mean, I already felt like this was a big deal.

So I kind of took my little extra 200 euros a month that I had and put them in Bitcoin. You know, just because I knew this would would be big. I mean, this was, you know, 2013.

And when I joined, it was March, literally the month later, it went from $10 to $260, only to go back to 60 over the next three months, then only to go back to 1200. So it was kind of like a, a compressed version of the bubbles of today. It was the exact same kind of flow, except that it was highly compressed.

Because everything happened in pretty much just a year, you know, from up down to down up. And yeah, and yeah, this is this, this was kind of like the pre Ethereum world, you know, and, and there was pretty much, you know, when I joined, there was March and in 2000, in July, I think two months later came the first kind of Bitcoin clones, because people realize, oh, wow, you know, I can also make Bitcoin, I just can fork that, give it a different name, maybe change a little bit of things.

And that was litecoin. And then people started to, you know, clone Bitcoin. And some were actually a bit more creative, there was a project called NXP, that was, you know, a little bit like a mini version of Ethereum, it had like a lot of different kind of functionality, you could create a colored coin, you know, assets, or how they called it, like the tokens of today, you could even trade them all on the same blockchain.

And they did all of this through like, different kind of transactions type that they introduced into their Proof of Stake network. And they also had a quite sophisticated interface. So this was kind of interesting to see.

And all of this pretty much happened within months, by the way, at the time. And then in, I think it was 2014. Was it 2014?

No, 2013. Yeah, I think it wasn't 2013. Already, that master coin came up with the idea of instead of creating a new blockchain, they could just encode, you know, new types of kind of protocol inside the Bitcoin blockchain.

And then you could create colored coins on top of the Bitcoin blockchain. And I think that's also the idea, like this is also what inspired Vitalik then to create Ethereum. And I found the master coin quite interesting from a concept point of view.

And then end of 2013, you know, Vitalik proposed the Ethereum white paper. And I mean, I heard of it, I kind of felt it was a, it was really a novel idea of it sounded kind of like a bit complicated to make a whole virtual machine running on a blockchain. But it sounded like a big, like a big idea.

So yeah, I followed that. And basically, in 2014, shortly before they made their ICO, I met the guys from Ethereum here in Berlin, at like a coworking space opening. And, you know, I'm, I kind of realized that what they wanted to do was a really cool idea, but had no one who could build the applications.

Their idea was kind of like, we make the network and we build, you know, we build the network, and then the rest of the people come by themselves. And I wrote a book about Meteor.js, which is a JavaScript framework that allows you to build single page applications. And I just really felt that was the perfect fit here, because you could build a JavaScript application that purely runs on your front end.

And then it could basically talk to this blockchain as the back end. So, you know, through some funny hoops, I actually, you know, joined Ethereum in 2015 in January. Actually, Alex was the one who hired me, or Alex saw a message in the Skype channel, because I reached out to Aaron from the foundation.

And Alex wanted to build, you know, this misbrowser concept. He was the UX designer. And he came up with this whole misbrowser idea.

And he made this video that you can still find on YouTube, where he explained the whole idea of like purposeful browser with applications where you could have, you know, your savings account and your friends and the DAO and funding and whatever not in there. But he was not really able to fully pull it off by himself. And then he saw, hey, there's this guy who can build full stack applications, and he's interested.

And then he kind of like, vouched to Jeffrey, that they should hire me. And Jeffrey Wilke, he was the lead for the GoEthereum client. And now it's Peter back in the day was Jeffrey.

He's the one who basically built the GoEthereum client. He basically, you know, I thought, okay, yeah, let's try him out. So they threw me this crazy, complex task.

They said, like, build a chat application based on the Whisper protocol. So I don't know if you guys know, but one of the early protocols next to Ethereum that kind of like they were working on was Whisper. And Whisper was a messaging protocol build.

The idea was it was a messaging protocol for whistleblowers. So you could basically send a message into the network. And nobody could know where it came from.

So you could obviously sign your messages, which was anonymous, but you couldn't trace it back to an AP or so. And the idea was, hey, build a front end for that, build like a front end for a chat app. And that's what I did.

So I built basically within a month and a half, like a full working chat app that kind of used the Whisper protocol. And that's kind of like impressed Jeffrey, I think. And yeah, that even had topics, by the way, which even within a channel, you could like filter message based on topics, which is something like we use like today in Discord with threads.

I had this idea to make it a bit more orderly if people chat and people want to talk about some subtopic in the same channel. Yeah, I mean, we it was working, you know, and then kind of like we this was my kind of into Ethereum in a short story.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, no, that was you definitely answered a bunch of my questions that I had. But that yeah, that that is a that is really interesting how how you got involved. So was it like, did you actually think Ethereum was going to be as big as it was?

Or were you just kind of getting into it because you were interested in especially with something like solidity? Like how was how was it coding with solidity when there was such little infrastructure to help? It was so new and different at the time you guys basically paved the way.

Like, was there a lot of issues? And you know, could you elaborate on some of those issues?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, I mean, there was totally nothing really. I mean, the language was literally I mean, the EVM was pretty much just like, built in its early form. The network was not live yet, because, you know, in January, I mean, the network started in July.

Yeah, there was pretty much no documentation really. So when I came in, there was the RPC endpoints, this is kind of like, you know, the, you know, provides these RPC endpoints, which is the API that then you know, an app can call. And a few of them are very important, for example, send transaction, obviously to send a transaction.

And the thing was a bit, you know, a mess. I mean, there were some things were encoded in hex and others were not in the naming was completely unclear. There was, for example, a function called count at, you know, which never anybody could guess what it means.

And I figured out, oh, this is how you count the transaction at a certain address to get the nonce. So basically, my first kind of little battle was with Gavin to convince him to that we can change the API. And so I came in, like kind of cleaned up the API.

And there was a bit of back and forth. And I had this very funny constellation that I was actually hired by goethereum by Jeffrey Wilkes team, which was sitting like legally in Amsterdam. But I was sitting in the Berlin office, which was the C++ team of Gavin Wood, you know, who later created parity and polkadot.

And so, but this gave me this specific opportunity to kind of that I could kind of speak up to Gavin, because he couldn't fire me, because it wasn't the other team. So I kind of did that. So I think he didn't like it that much.

But basically, it was, I mean, when I joined, and I really, you know, the idea was, hey, let's build a, we know, web three browser that where applications can run, and they can then talk to smart contracts and stuff. That felt like a completely impossible task. Because I didn't understand any of that shit.

That was completely novel. I mean, they literally invented a virtual machine from scratch, right? And then you have ABI and all of this low level stuff.

And solidity was in its early days. Gavin already hired Christian, right reasoner, who was the, who is the solidity developer. So basically, me trying to figure stuff out was asking Christian, or, you know, trying to, I don't know, through like, asking some people to figure out how stuff works.

There was no proper documentation or anything. And within three months, we had the first working version of the myth browser, which is actually in hindsight, a completely impossible task. Because the tooling was so I mean, non existent, basically.

So there was pretty much solidity that was web three.js. And it's very early version that was started by I think Jeffrey and then Gavin, like continued it. And then Marek came in, who was supposed to be developing this library. For the people who don't know what web three.js is, it's basically kind of like this little library that you use in the middle. So if you're a JavaScript developer, you know JavaScript, right? You don't know solidity, and you don't know how to speak to the VM. And web three.js is doing exactly that kind of translation. So that in your code, you can just call functions, like on an object like you would do in JavaScript, but it translated to EVM by code so that the smart connect on the end can understand it. And that was in its very early days, and also very confusingly written. I mean, the API was quite confusing, too.

And that was kind of like the main tool. And then we put that into that browser. And, yeah, I mean, we basically, you know, there was no standard way of how a D app would, you know, interact with a smart contact.

There was nothing yet there, you know, it was all just us making it up basically. And web three.js kind of was like the middleman. So we injected that object into a D app, you know, when you load an app in this browser, we injected this web three object in and the idea was, okay, now D apps can use this object to talk to smart contracts, like as a JavaScript object.

That's kind of like that what later became this injected object kind of later became the theorem provider. That's how MetaMask, you know, and other extensions, for example, and apps talk to a D app. But yeah, you had to basically figure everything out with MetaMask.

I didn't listen to the space with Alex, but he probably already explained all of that, too, I guess. So probably a lot of overlap here.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah, there is. I just wanted to get a bit of different perspectives, because I know Alex was a bit on the different side of things, whereas he didn't really code as much, but he put together the team and, you know, some of the thought process behind things, whereas you were more like the coder and developer of things.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I mean, he was the visionary, you know, he had the idea with the Mist browser and, you know, he was a great UX designer. So he basically built all the front ends and the interfaces and put them all into something existing. And yeah, I mean, then basically the first D app that we built was a wallet.

It was the Ethereum wallet. And because people wanted to have that wallet before we had the browser fully ready, we even packaged a version that kind of like just loaded the wallet without the browser part. But it's on the end was exact same code base.

And that's why there's like this notion of a Mist browser and Mist wallet. And it was all confusing for people because they were pretty much similar, but kind of different. So there was the version that you could download the Mist browser where the wallet was one app or you could have the pre-packaged, you know, just wallet.

And it was one of the better looking, you know, wallets out there. I mean, at the time, you know, I mean, definitely everything was pretty ugly looking at the time. And I mean, and you could interact with smart contracts.

And then Alex came up with the idea to make a generic kind of a page where you could just load any smart contract. And based on the ABI, it would completely display you like input fields for the functions. So you can just interact with the smart contract right from an interface.

And yeah, I mean, the Mist browser was pretty much in use from the beginning of the network up until like, I mean, pretty busy in use for a year after that, or one and a half years after that. The problem what happened is because we wanted to try the full on decentralized way, that means the app was actually running a full node under the hood. So when you're running it, it actually spin up a get node under the hood, which then synchronizes the blockchain.

And when it synchronized the blockchain, we popped up the interface, you know, and then it could do stuff. So the longer the chain got, the slower the synchronization process was. And obviously, if you were not using the Mist browser for a few weeks, then, you know, the synchronization was a little slower.

And the user experience was not great. And that kind of like inspired, you know, Kumaris from MetaMask to create MetaMask, you know, he wanted to make the less decentralized version as a browser extension, which just used an RPC endpoint, an external one. So you don't have to synchronize the whole node.

And yeah, in a way, MetaMask was an answer to the Mist browser in a way to make it a bit more user friendly. While we tried to do it the full on decentralized way, you know, and see how well this can work. One interesting thing is that in 2016, the DAO happened, the first decentralized autonomous organization or the first DAO ever.

I mean, bigger one. And the main interface for the DAO was literally the Mist browser, because you could load in the DAO contracts, and you had got this interface where you could interact with the DAO. So they use that our Mist browser as kind of like the front end for it.

Yeah, and that then blew up. So split the network into in a way. Yeah, it was, I mean, the Mist browser was like an essential part of the Ethereum history.

It was kind of the first one and a half years of discovering smart contracts. And I think what it did is, I mean, not only was it the wallet for everybody at the time, but it also inspired all the developers and DApps that came after that, because they kind of literally, they wanted to be at a similar, you know, UX level on par with the Mist browser. So I think we kind of leveled the game a little bit, or we lifted up the level of, you know, what people build.

It was not so nerdy looking like an old school Windows 3.11, you know, window or whatever, but it was a bit cooler looking. Yeah, and it was kind of, we paved the way for how do you build DApps, you know, I built some example DApps, and an example, like, you know, modules and tools you could use in DApps, and I made like videos explaining how you build DApps. And, you know, I was kind of like, you know, figuring it all out, and then explaining it to others, how you do all of this stuff, basically.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that's so interesting. It was just, it was more, you know, laying the tracks as you were going, like, as the airplane was in the sky, you were making adjustments, which is difficult. And I know Vitalik has kind of, you know, talked about that a bit, when it comes to building Ethereum, like the planes in the sky already, you know, it's, it's kind of hard to, to adjust at times why this thing is already, you know, moving.

So yeah, yeah, no, that's, that's really great. And I know you alluded to the DAO, but did you know that Alex actually tried to start a little DAO with Mist, like a year before the DAO? And there's a GitHub page for it, too, and everything.

And I even talked to Alex about it. I was like, hey, remember, you tried to start a DAO with Mist Coin? He's like, I don't even remember that.

It was pretty...

[Speaker 1]
I mean, yeah, I mean, I mean, I was there, obviously. I mean, what he did is basically, he built some example contracts, as kind of like little example code snippets, and put them on the Ethereum website. He just wanted to show people, hey, what can be done with smart contracts?

And, you know, and one example was like a voting contract, like a DAO. Yeah, basically, that was one of the examples on the Ethereum website. And yeah, I mean, with the Mist Buzzer, you could have an interface for it.

And I mean, this definitely inspired the DAO. Yeah, I mean, that example contract certainly inspired Christoph Jentsch, who then later built the DAO. Yeah, I mean, it was just not used.

There was no DAO that was kind of like, you know, published and voted on. It was just basically the first kind of code of it.

[Speaker 2]
No, yeah, I mean, it just adds further to the history and the lore of what was, you know, trying to be kind of implemented or played around with by, you know, you guys with, you know, Mist and just, you know, the beginning iterations of all these new ideas.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, everything was already like, you know, this is the thing. And again, people talk about NFTs or tokens or DAOs. I mean, these ideas, they were around since pretty much the beginning.

And we did the early experiments and play around and explanation videos and all this stuff. And, you know, I put examples just to, yeah, show what's possible. But it was obviously, then it took a long time for people to really kind of finally build all the more sophisticated versions out that on the end were used and by thousands of people like the DAO, for example, that was kind of a bit unexpectedly fast growing.

Let's call it like that.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. All right. Now for the juicy question, what, you know, when was the inspiration or thought process or what was the inspiration or thought process into creating the ERC-20 standard?

Did you reference any like pieces of prior development or use any pieces of research to do so? Or was it more just like bouncing ideas and conversations back and forth with like you and Vitalik or some other developer?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I mean, so basically what happened here is that Vitalik, I mean, people wanted to make tokens on Ethereum. There were like demands for that. And then Vitalik, we had this kind of wiki pages in Ethereum and Vitalik wrote like a wiki page called, I think it's called Standard API Contracts or whatever, you know, he gave it some weird name and he wrote three kind of standard or basic ideas of a standard.

One was the token standard. The other one was some kind of registry thing. I forgot what the third one was.

So we had this discussion internally, you know, like some people from the community and basically people from within Ethereum. And we discussed about this. And at the time, Martin B.C. actually created a repository in Ethereum GitHub and he called it EIP. And his idea was to make Ethereum improvement proposals, right, so that we can evolve the chain. And Martin was really just focused on, you know, the consensus development and, you know, he wanted to introduce Wasm instead of the EVM. And so his idea was to have like this place where improvements can be proposed that happened pretty much exactly the same time when, you know, when ES20 happened.

And so I thought, OK, that's actually a great place to kind of like put this out there, what Vitalik here, you know, initially drafted and have a proper discussion. So I took this example and I created a document in the EIP space and I called it ERC, Ethereum Request for Comment. This is based on this RFC process called Request for Comment in the Web Standards.

And I just changed a few little things and changed the order on some function names and put it in a proper specification. So kind of my work was to put it in a proper format, let's say. And then the discussion really started to shift over there and pretty much 60 some people started discussing.

And basically on the end, we didn't change much, but we just had a bunch of back and forth over 300 comments. And then people started really implementing it this way. And because, for example, I was not fully in agreement with all the functions, for example, I was not a fan of this transfer from and disapprove functions.

I thought we should actually notify the smart contract and not just allow an external contract to then pull in money. That's why when I created the Mistcoin, which was basically just the idea of, okay, let me just make an example token so we can test it out in the Mist browser, because we needed a token to test it in our interfaces. And I just thought, okay, let me just create one on mainnet.

And I specifically created it without those functions that I didn't like. Hence why your original Mistcoin doesn't have the approve and transfer from function, which then makes it nowadays incompatible with Uniswap and hence why it needed to be wrapped. It needed to be wrapped so it gets these transfer from functions.

So I created this while we were discussing and in this wiki page with Vitalik, I kind of created this example token just to test around and play around with it. And then two weeks later, I actually created the ERC draft, like the specification issue. And it was just the issue number 20.

So I just created an issue. It happened to be number 20. And I called it Ethereum request for comment.

And yeah, that kind of became later the standard name. There was never the intention of it at all. And my little test token there then was just sitting around on my wallet, like as a little historical aspect.

And already in the early days, there were some people, we send it to some people just for fun, just to also test the Mist browser interface and the wallet and show people that you can see these tokens and how it works. So Alex gave some out for free. We just like spread it.

And then over the years, other people came to me and asked, hey, can you have some I would really like to collect? And I really didn't care much, honestly, because it was just a test token, really. But that was also the whole ERC20 explosion kind of started pretty much.

So in November 2017, I kind of put that proposal up there. And what it really made possible for people is there was the days of the ICO. So people wanted to make ICOs.

And suddenly, there was the possibility that you could create a token on Ethereum, which with very little effort, and you could technically fundraise with this was the idea of many people without that you have to create your own blockchain and everything, which also had the key yet that you need to figure out what your token does, which is probably the downside of many of the ICOs later, that they didn't really had the proper purpose, I guess.

But it exploded really, like, since like, basically, four or five months after that, you know, after ERC20's proposal, it really started to kind of like, you know, go bananas. And hence, right in 2016, 17 and 18, we had all this crazy ICO boom cycles, with eventually billions of dollars, I guess, hundreds of billions of dollars being raised in ICOs, pretty much. And actually, funny enough, you know, like, I didn't really actually really correlate all of this ICO stuff and all of this to me at all until like Florian Klartz from Common Ground told me, hey, Fabian, actually, we sat in the car once and he told me, actually, do you realize that you create ERC20?

And with that, all of this became like, possible. And that was like in 2016, some more or later, actually. And that's the first time that I kind of even realized this, because I didn't really think about it that much, honestly, that this was somehow correlated.

Yeah, this is the early day story.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. So when it came to the ERC20 standard, you were saying that it was like a group of, there was actually like a wiki page and a group of like 60 people that were talking back and forth and kind of like, were collaborating on, you know, figuring out the standard.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, the initial proposal was actually from Vitalik. And then we just, I just changed a few things. So the proposal was pretty much Vitalik's idea in its initial form.

And we then just discussed, I mean, I made a little bit of changes and I brought it into a format that, you know, allowed actually people to understand how it works and everything else, because it just threw together things quickly in a wiki page. And then after that, the conversations happened, you know, where there was back and forth on certain aspects of it. But ultimately, when we kind of, kind of agreed to, you know, a more or less solid version, it didn't change that much from, I mean, there was a few things added, but it didn't, that didn't change massively from the initial idea.

A fun fact is that it wasn't draft until 2017. So I only really moved it from draft to final in, I think, September 2017.

[Speaker 2]
Wow. Okay.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, that was, yeah, I didn't know that. It was way, way, way after it was massively adopted that this even moved into the final state. Why?

Because I thought that was a point where it's definitely not going to change anymore. I mean, it was so widely used that the chances that it's going to change zero.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah. Did you believe, like, that standard? Maybe, I don't know if it was like, let's say 2015 when you were writing it.

Did you believe that, like, the ERC-20, that standard would achieve the relevance that it did and be as big as it is here? You didn't think that?

[Speaker 1]
No, not at all. I mean, in fact, I didn't even care at all. I mean, there was not the, I mean, I mean, I knew people want to make tokens.

I didn't expect that this specific standard will make it. And even, there was no standardization process. There was not even the idea of that, you know, we need to now talk about smart contract standards.

I mean, it was just that people want to make tokens. So, we came up with some, you know, way of how you can make tokens. And, you know, that's what it was.

Only in hindsight later, it was clear that this was, you know, the first smart contract standard. On top of this, the most successful one. And on top of this, that's the process of how you have to do this.

You know, you now come together, you create your own standards, and then people, if they're using it, it becomes an actual standard. And then, you know, this is what's needed for an EVM chain. There was no, this was not really clear at all.

I mean, we had no idea. Right. You know, there was no process or anything.

This was just, you know, this all just came, it just was made up as we went, basically.

[Speaker 2]
Right. So, yeah, so basically, you said it wasn't really finalized until September 2017. And then a few months later, that's when the ERC-721 was finalized as a standard, correct?

Or did it, did 721 also take?

[Speaker 1]
721, so the thing, yeah, 721 was actually created in, I think, October 2017. So, that was even after that. So, the thing is, when basically the ICO wave kind of flattened down a little bit, or crashed, then people kind of moved on and think, hey, what can you else do with tokens than just like, you know, numbers.

So, I mean, there was already the ideas of NFTs was nothing new, so that you could, you know, identicate things on a blockchain, and that you can make unique things, that was already around. But there was just, it was, people were so busy creating ICOs and investing in ICOs, I guess, that really, that was all the focus. So, yeah, there was some like, and then, yeah, and pretty much in 2017, when this came, you know, when this kind of hype slowed down a little bit, that's when these other ideas became a bit more, you know, in the focus.

And then there was these people who think, okay, let's create, you know, an NFT standard. And even before 721, which on the 721 is a fairly simple modification of ESC20, because it only really changed the token amount that you transfer to a token ID. And they did some other modifications, they introduced, for example, exactly what they wanted to introduce, this that you notify another smart contract, they introduced it as well.

But also, this came actually out of earlier improvements. So basically, after ESC20 was created, and right after it already started to become popular, there were people who were thinking, hey, we need to improve this token standard, because it was not perfect. The whole idea that you needed to use this proof and transfer from was a total hack.

I mean, I never liked it, because it was a hack. But the agreement back in the day, when we wrote it was, okay, we don't know, you know, what people can build on a smartphone blockchain. And we don't know what's the best practice in such a system.

And before we make a mistake, and people lose money, let's do the most safe way we can do, which just means we just approve a contract, and then this contract can move it. So if we would notify another contract on it, after a transaction happened, that could lead to all kinds of crazy other potential vulnerabilities that we just were not fully understanding at the time, hence why we didn't go with that. Even though that was the right approach to take, hence why all of these improvement proposals after, there was a standard called 223.

I mean, guess what, it's 200 standards later, or 200 at least, you know, issues. By the way, also what needs to be understood, the IP repository, the way GitHub works is every time you create an issue, or you make a pull request, it counts up a number. So if we have 7,000, you know, ERCs, that doesn't mean this is 7,000, or 7,000, there's a number 7,000, that doesn't mean there's 7,000 standard proposals.

There's people just took this issue number as a counter. And yeah, there's many issues, just discussions sometimes in the middle, and that counted up the number. So 223 was the first one who kind of tried to solve this problem of notifying the other contracts.

And that didn't really get traction. Then Jordi Bailina had this idea of 777. That was a bit later to unify this as well.

And basically, the 721 standard kind of really took from this 223 idea, kind of incorporated this. That's why the NFT center has a safe transfer function, or a safe transfer from, or whatever it's called. And that's the kind of like the idea of like, you know, notifying the other contract as well.

So they kind of kept them both, like the original transfer function and plus the safe transfer function, which then on the end makes the whole standard even more quirky looking and very inconsistent. And hence why this is all pretty much like, you know, a hack, something that tries to be backwards compatible, but also tries to introduce new features. And then you have all of these different function namings that are very confusing.

Hence why we're in the mess. And what you said initially with, you know, Ethereum is like a plane that is flying and you're trying to fix it as it flies. The thing is, the more it flies, the bigger it gets.

And the more it gets, it's more like a ship actually. It's like the bigger the ship gets, the slower you can move it around, right? Like a big ship needs a very big radius, a small ship needs a small radius.

Hence why any of these things, once there's a network effect, like, you know, ERC20 or the token standards, it gets very difficult to make changes, right? And convince people of novel ideas and then introducing new standards. Hence why it took so long, even for like such a small, you know, addition like an NFT versus a token, which is pretty much the same.

[Speaker 2]
Right. No, yeah. I was actually looking into the ERC223 recently and it kind of made me think a bit about, you know, just the ERC20 and if it was created in, you know, if it could have been really my question for you is like, looking back now and what you know today, is there anything that you would have added to the ERC20 standard to make it better?

Or do you think it was a good first iteration that really is going to continue to thrive for these, you know, coming years?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, I mean, we all know the quirkiness of ERC20, you know, and this whole thing with like approving, you know, contracts, you know, that's what led to so many losses, right? Because people go to a website, then the interface of MetaMask says, oh, this website tries to request, you know, access to your funds. And then it sounds, looks also harmless.

And then people click OK, and suddenly all the money's gone. Because this approved process, as nice as it is, it's hyper dangerous. You're literally approving a third party to move your money.

So it's almost the same as giving them the key to your car or to your house. So the thing is, what I did over the last few years is exactly what you just said, you know, I mean, fixing all of these standards. This is what I have done with Luxo.

I mean, on the end, they were not that I mean, they were good first iterations, that's for sure. And they were the first, you know, experiments, but they weren't by no means thought out. Neither did we even have the knowledge or understanding, you know, how the space works, and how, you know, people, what kind of smart contracts people will build, and how they will interact with each other, and what makes sense, what doesn't make sense.

There was no experience at the time. So hence, it was the best there was at the time. But it's by no means the best we could do today.

And I mean, that's what I did in Luxo, you know, I literally standardized, I improved all these standards, you know, actually, we introduced a new ERC20, that's called LSP7, or Luxo Standards Proposal Number Seven, and we introduced a new NFTs called LSP8. And we introduced a smart contract account that is a very multifunctional, super generic smart contract account that, you know, everybody would probably need right now, if they would understand the tech. But yeah, it's exactly that.

So I spent the last five years redoing this stuff, because it was just simply not, it was just like, you know, it grew based on a need, but it didn't came out of sophisticated research.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, for sure. I have plenty of questions about Luxo, which I want to finish up on, so that we can get everybody nice and fresh about the Luxo environment. One interesting question that I had, that was been asked to me by a few people, what was like the whole idea behind the whole Doge and ETH bridge?

And why send 5% of Mistcoin supply to the Doge ETH bridge multi-sig? Like, I don't know if you're familiar with that going on?

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. I mean, this was like something that like Vitalik, I mean, I think there was this whole thing then. So basically, you know, the first copy of Bitcoin was, you know, Litecoin.

And then, you know, at some point, somebody just misspelled the word Doge. And then someone else thought it was super funny to create another clone of Bitcoin and calling it Dogecoin, just for the rules, basically. And you know, that thing completely took off.

It was literally the first memecoin. And because it took so much off, and at the time, there was, I think it got quite some attention. And this was, I'm not sure what the status of Ethereum was at the time, how big it was, or how popular we were at the time.

But it was basically the idea to, I think it was the idea to kind of like, you know, let's say, marry, or like, kind of like, you know, kind of, yeah, maybe like, you know, cross the bridge back again to the Ethereum, to the Bitcoin world. So because what happened is when Ethereum came onto the scene, you know, there was a lot of people were very hyped about it. They thought like, this is the next big thing, you know, I mean, same as I, I came, obviously, we were all Bitcoiners, you know, because that's what it was, you know, that was the biggest thing we all thought, okay, Bitcoin, maybe the big master chain, and all the others are super cool and interesting experiments.

But we were all hyped about Ethereum as well. But there were some people who were not. They were like, felt very threatened, because they thought, okay, if now people go to Ethereum, then Bitcoin will lose in value, but we need to understand Bitcoin is the most decentralized and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.

So yeah, this was the time when the Bitcoin maximalist was born. And the Bitcoiners were kind of okay with Dogecoin, because it used kind of the same protocol. And the idea of Dogecoin and befriending it in a way with Ethereum, and I think this was Alex, you know, try, I guess, and this, it was really just more like an experiment, you know, an experiment of like, hey, can we build a bridge?

And, you know, can we build a bridge between kind of Dogecoin and Ethereum, which is the same as building a bridge between Bitcoin and Ethereum. And he just found with the Miscon funny, I guess. I mean, this was something he did.

I found it interesting, but I didn't care much, actually, at the time about it, really. It was just a play, I would say.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Who sent the 50,000 miss there? Do you know?

I think it was him.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, I'm not sure. I think it was him. It was definitely not me.

[Speaker 2]
So, yeah, it's something that we're very interested over at the DAO to hopefully maybe get some initiative started with it. But there's a lot of famous people on that multisig there.

[Speaker 1]
And so, I mean, I don't know, maybe you have to explain to me. So what's, it's still there? It's still existing?

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. I mean, all the Ethereum was taken out, obviously, because it was a bounty to get the bridge made. So all the Ethereum was taken out, but there still sits 5% of the missed supply.

It's just a funny, interesting little tidbit. But I got the signers on it are Alex, Vitalik. I don't know.

Are you a signer on it? I'm not sure.

[Speaker 1]
No, I was not. I didn't really care about that bridge too much.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. So I think there's eight signers or six signers or something like that.

[Speaker 1]
These two still have the keys.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that's the question. But I mean, I'm sure Vitalik and all those people have a lot more going on at the moment. So maybe one day, maybe one day there'll be a nice little gift to the DAO to get some initiatives going.

But just something I was thinking about. So what was your initial reaction when you discovered the recent Mistcoin revival and what was taking place in the community and how it began to build around such an interesting piece of history?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, there were people that were people over the years who asked me if I could send them. So I sent them a bit here and there. But it was also not that easy to even interact with the contract because it was kind of like you could do sending and stuff like this, but you could import it into, you know, Metamask, obviously, but you couldn't interact with more complex contracts because of that missing function and everybody agreeing to this transfer from stuff.

Yeah, I mean, I just sent a few around just for fun. I honestly didn't think about I didn't I mean, when I created it, I kind of thought, hmm, could this have value in the future? And then I thought shortly about it and thought, hmm, but for what people would use it?

I don't know. So I don't think so. That was my thought back in the day when I created it.

And then when people, you know, were interested, I thought, sure, cool, collect it. You know, I mean, there's a lot of people collect all kinds of stuff. So I thought maybe this can become a collectible.

And then when, I don't know, the Miscoin guy who made the Miscoin Twitter account came and, you know, said that he created this wrapper and now it can be used and traded and they were all like super hyped about it. And I thought, OK, that's interesting. That's very unexpected.

But it kind of makes sense, you know, in the time where meme coins are the big deal and collectibles and NFTs and everything is about. And now also, it is a piece of history, right? It is literally the ultimate piece of this token history, because it is the first of its kind.

And it has been really around for a long time. And, you know, the Dogecoin bridge was kind of funny. So, yeah, I mean, it's totally, you know, part of the Ethereum evolution since pretty much the beginning.

And now it's kind of being resurrected in some funny way.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that's kind of leads to my next question. Do you, are there any, you have any, like, suggestions or any cool initiatives or ideas you would like to see for the further development of Miscoin? Or is it, you think, just alone on the historical value that it would carry on to be a token that's at least collected and held in people's wallets?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, it's in a way, you know, same with art, you know. Why is art interesting? I mean, on the one hand, it's about the idea, the concept, but it's also really often about the history.

And fun fact, you know, art becomes a lot more valuable when the artist dies. That doesn't mean I'm going to die, but...

[Speaker 2]
Oh, yeah, well, relax, Fabi.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, no, I'm just saying that, you know, once time passed and once the history happened, you know, that's when this stuff becomes super interesting suddenly. And suddenly it's like, you know, the thing that people, you know, talk about. And yeah, because it really enshrines this time at the time.

So the collectible aspect is definitely there. And it's going to grow just because, you know, time passes more on and the Ethereum history and the token history. I mean, this space has grown to what it is because of the token standard.

[Speaker 2]
Right.

[Speaker 1]
Because of everything that happened after. Literally almost every business, you go to any blockchain conference, 99% of those projects are about just tokens or NFTs nowadays as well. And yeah, so this is basically a huge piece of history.

But honestly, you know, the cool thing about tokens is that it is the same like with Dogecoin or whatever. I mean, things can be used for whatever people want to use it for, you know, they could create a community around it that, you know, serves other purposes and functionalities than just a collection. And then you can wrap it and you can even issue, you know, NFTs out of this.

Maybe we'll bridge over to Luxor at some point.

[Speaker 2]
Is that in Fabian's plans? Is that in your plans? Is that potentially a really secret alpha here?

Like what's going on?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, we are working on a bridge together with Hashi and that will be a generic bridge that could also potentially bridge things like Mistcoin over. So yeah, I mean, once that bridge is working, you can pretty much, I mean, we have to see, you know, how the issue, how the mining process works, but technically you could bridge almost everything. So I mean, every token, let's call it that, at least in the early form.

I mean, we have to see, I mean, probably in the beginning, we have to see if this is a manual thing that there needs to be some whitelisted or if it just works for everyone, we have to see. But technically, yeah.

[Speaker 2]
I think we'd make the whitelist, Fabian. I think we would.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, I would definitely like to see it bridging over to Luxor, that's for sure.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I mean, I have a lot of questions about Luxor as well. So yeah, let's head over to a few of those questions. Well, first, how was your experience with Ethereum and the ERC standard kind of influenced the development approach in what you're working on with Luxor, which we touched up a bit on, but I mean, if you would like to elaborate again.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I mean, it all started out as the idea of, okay, how can we bring blockchain to ordinary users that are not so technical? How can we bring blockchain to the masses and how can we bring it to the non-technical people of the world? And I mean, the idea of a blockchain formed for around lifestyle and culture was just a really good fit because at the time it was all about money and DeFi.

And sure, you could build the money Legos and can extend this to eternity, but blockchain can do just so much more. Blockchain can be relevant for governance, voting, network states, social media can help with truth and journalism and it can help with funding across the globe, community efforts of all kinds. It can help with memberships, it can help with pretty much anything when humans need to coordinate.

Blockchain can be a key factor and needs to be a key factor of it. And that was just, you know, something that was not really on the forefront at the time, but it was really clear to me that, you know, if we create such, I mean, this could be the perfect Broshan horse to bring decentralization into the masses. You know, if you do things that feel easy and fun, social and culture, you know, lifestyle, then you get, you know, people who are usually not willing to, you know, invest their life saving into random coins, you know, interested, right.

And that was the idea of Luxor really. But I also realized that the most important piece here is the wallet and the account that you're using, you know, that needs to be simple, that needs to be more than just a private key, that needs to be something that's actually functional. So they're kind of like, you know, really, and there's a fun fact that, you know, ESC 725, which is the core piece of Luxor, if you will.

That's the standard that I proposed in 2017. And guess what? It's the exact standard after 721.

And there is 722 and 723, there were just two other GitHub issues that had, you know, were not really relevant. So, and 724 wasn't, I mean, there were three GitHub issues in the middle, I think, that didn't have really that much importance. And so it's the exact standard after 721.

So while those guys modified ESC 20, and came up with the idea, let's just, you know, make it a transferable ID rather than an amount, I came up with the SmartConnect account, which is kind of crazy, actually, if you think about it. So and this I created before I created Luxor, or before we started Luxor, the idea, but I realized, you know, when we discussed Luxor, that this standard is really essential, because it must, you know, if we don't have a proper account, you know, then how do you get this to the masses? And also, if you want to introduce lifestyle things, you know, it's about brands and, and creators, and people want to collect, and they want to show what they are, the account, you know, needs to be a profile, it needs to be something that you humanly identify with, it needs to be something that's long lasting, right, it goes a little bit opposite to the Bitcoin idea where you want to be as hidden as possible, hence never use the private key twice, you know, in the early days of Bitcoin. But here's the opposite, right, we want to have identifiability.

So we need to make sure that this account has a face, this account can be long term managed, this account cannot just be one private key that you now need to keep safe forever, it needs to be a proper smart account. So I thought of the idea about this proper smart account in 2017. And over the course of the last many years, six years, I basically, you know, like, I built out, you know, I first formed the idea of the standards, or the early versions of it.

And we developed as a team, this, this account standard to its more to its final state, which is now. But along the way, we also said, hey, okay, if we're already on evolving the standards, and we anyway, you know, have a new chain, because these standards could never be adopted on an existing chain. I mean, see how difficult it is even for Ethereum to convince people to move to smart accounts, and how things like 4337 took forever, you know, which was a bundle of standards that I need to perform into one to even get agreement on.

So you see, when you have the network effect is so difficult, hence why new chain was literally perfect to introduce a new foundation. So while we are at it, we thought, okay, we can also improve the token standards, you know, and we can also improve, you know, the NFT standard. And we can then also make sure that all of this works nicely in harmony together in a holistic way.

And that all all of this is really like, you know, tuned to each other. So that and also build in such a way that it can be even more flexible, that even more stuff can be developed on top of this, even more things can be standardized on top of these things. So it really like kicked off the whole idea of improving the existing standard landscape when it comes to the core building blocks.

So those last six years was really about, you know, like, looking at this stuff from like a perspective of what if we would start from scratch, what could we do better? And how could we do it? That it's that it is more possible, you know, down the road.

And that's a thought that you usually can't have an Ethereum because you need to think first of how am I going to make sure what I'm inventing here right now is still compatible with everything that's there. Right. And then I can think, what can I add?

But always keep in mind that it needs to be compatible. So when you go, you know, this route that you're very, then you're very limited in what you can do, because you can only really just, you know, move the big ship so and so many degrees, but you can't make it a 30 degree turn. Otherwise, you know, the ship wouldn't do it, you know, the ship doesn't follow you.

So we had this great opportunity to think it up from scratch. And we basically improved the token standards in the sense that, I mean, I first started out with, you know, making sure that the function names are all the same between tokens and NFTs, because it's pretty much 90% the same kind of thing, right? Once you transfer an amount, and the other you transfer an ID.

So why would the functions be all very different? So we can unify that. Then we introduced the ability that it notifies another smart contract, but instead of going with the idea of two to three, which had like a on token receive function, or seven to five or seven to one had this idea of like an on seven to one receive function, or even like 1820, which is the 777 standards, which by the way, LX, Lux E is a 777 standard, where there was a specific contract where you needed to read if that other contract can now receive it or not, they get this idea of like the registry thing. So basically, the problem with all of those is, if you want to have a generic smartphone account, and you now need to for every protocol that comes up in the future, add a new function, just so you're able to be notified by that, you know, whatever protocol somebody comes up with, then the chip would never end.

And you would end with hundreds of functions in your in your nice wallet, a smartphone account, right? That's not a great idea. So, so the first thought then, you know, was okay, we need a universal receiver, we need a universal function that any protocol can call.

And it just calls it with a type ID, and some data. And based on the type ID, then you know, your profile could do certain things. And that became the fun fact, the first standard of Luxo, it's called LSP one, is the universal receiver.

So I started out with that, because the first thought I was, okay, if I make a generic smartphone account, how can I make sure the tokens can be generically, you know, informing these wallets, these smartphone accounts and wallets. So hence why, you know, universal receiver was the most important one. So and all of these thinking, you know, this kind of thinking you can only do when you make things from scratch, in a clean way with a clean slate, we're not bound to, you know, backwards compatibility on any of this stuff.

So I think that also puts Luxo in a very unique position, because it's the first chain, where the foundational buildings blocks, or the first EVM chain, definitely, where the foundational buildings blocks have been thought out from scratch new without considering, you know, to be backwards compatible to all stuff, which makes it a lot nicer, a lot cleaner, and a lot more flexible of what it can do. And it works really holistically with a generic smartphone account system, which is what everybody wants to get to right now, right?

[Speaker 2]
Yeah. So I see Luxo touts, like this innovative approach with universal profiles. How do you see universal profiles kind of changing web three and how it is approached by the masses?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, it's a smartphone account, it's basically, I mean, the sounds maybe a bit bold, but it's, in my opinion, the most developed and most sophisticated smartphone account in existence right now. So if you have a smartphone account, you need a few properties. One thing you need is you need to have the ability to obviously hold money or like do anything on a blockchain.

So you need to be able to generically execute, right? I mean, that's what Gnosis Safe has as well, right? That's kind of clear.

But what else you need is this universal receiver, right? You need to be able that the smartphone can react on anything. And in universal profiles, it's done in such a way that you can even delegate this reaction, this notification reaction onto an external contract you can change over time.

So you can even change the way your profile reacts on incoming stuff. But most importantly, and that's funny enough, I haven't seen anywhere in any of the current smart contract account ideas, you need to be able to attach information. Because if you don't attach information, then you're missing the most key feature of an account, which is the stuff I can understand, stuff I can read.

I mean, it's not only about a profile picture, right? That's the most obvious thing you can do. But if you want to have an on-chain account, you want to be able to attach information so that the protocol that interacts with your account can read certain things.

You could, for example, attach KYC data, you could attach serial knowledge proofs, you could attach obviously profile pictures, you could attach some kind of lists, like follower lists or whatever else that you need to be on the profile. So it just opens up the possibilities of protocols you can develop, because now the accounts that interact on-chain with your smart contract have information that's readable by that smart contract as well. And that just opens up the possibilities by a thousand X.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, this is actually very interesting, Fabian, because I'm actually building kind of like a social FI product at the moment. I mean, it's a bit off topic and I'm just seeing how much this type of information and use cases could blend into what we're doing when it comes to, specifically on the influencer side and profiles for influencers and kind of making these profiles like a reputation-based score almost, where you can actually kind of get an idea of the people that you're following, maybe what their trading history looks like, a lot of different things here that could overall make the space safer. Yeah, so welcome to Universal Profiles.

[Speaker 1]
That's exactly what it is.

[Speaker 2]
We need to have a talk then about this.

[Speaker 1]
So if you're building your system on Universal Profiles, you literally can probably save yourself a lot of time, because 80% of it is already built out. I mean, you have the core account now that is generically manageable and executable. So now all you need to worry about is building your dashboard that reads this information and maybe some information that gets attached there, but you have now the account.

So we're the first ones who have merged the information of the account with the acting's address. So in every other systems that have been there so far, it's always like the wallet, and then there's maybe your ENS data, right? And your ENS holds the information like your name and maybe some other information, and then the wallet is separate from that.

So problem with that is, because it's not the same thing, your wallet can swap under the hood while the data stays at the same place. Or even if you look at Forecaster there, that's your ID. That's again, the wallet can change.

So whatever does something on chain is never fully tied to that information. In Universal Profiles, it's the same address. It's the same contract.

Your contract has the generic key value store that you can just call, get data, whatever key you want to read, and that's whatever data stored under. And that's the same address that's also doing the interaction for another smart contract. So your smart contract knows always about message sender, right?

He knows who's calling him. So he can always call back and check, instead of going to a third place and checking, hey, something here in the ENS registry or something in this registry or that registry, it can just look literally at the place that called him, which is the profile. So the first one we merged this together, that the information space is the same as the execution space.

And fun fact, that's the essence of Universal Profiles. It's ER725 X and Y. ER725 is standard, it's split in two.

X is the execution and Y is the data store. That's why Y, it's funny. Why?

You can ask a question. And fun fact, that's also the human chromosomes that I only figured out later by accident that I figured out, okay, actually, yes, this is the human chromosome. But it's basically your ER725 account is basically between this information store and this general execution.

Then it has a bunch of other feature like the universal receiver. And then there's a key manager in front, so you can properly manage that thing with multiple keys from different devices and permissions and blah, blah, blah. It has a lot of more features, but in its essence, it's just literally a smart account.

Literally, that's what it is. It's an account that has a lot more information on it than just a dumb public key.

[Speaker 2]
Are they so bound or can you move them around, the 725?

[Speaker 1]
So that's the thing. I don't know how to answer this. I mean, to say it in a nice way.

It's not a token. It has nothing to do with the concept of an NFT or a token. It's an account.

So it's all bound because yes, it is the account itself. So the account is the wallet and the wallet is the profile. And it's the same thing at the same address.

There is no differentiation. So it's not that you have a wallet. So your wallet and your private key is irrelevant now, because that's not the one who is acting on chain.

What's acting on chain is your smart account, which is also the one who holds information. Whoever signs the transaction to control that is irrelevant, because that's in the front. That's handled by the browser extension that we have that basically signs everything that goes through your key manager.

The key manager checks that the stuff is allowed and that your profile is allowed to, that the controller key can do something. And once he executes, he executes through your smart account. So the other contract that you're interacting with only reads message.sender, which is your profile. So whatever happens before, even if you have 50 steps in before, before the thing goes from offline to your profile, all the checks before are basically irrelevant. They're irrelevant because it's not seen by the other smart contract. So it's soulbound because it's the same thing.

There's always that thing like a wallet tied to whatever, an NFT. You only care about the universal profile address. You don't care who controls it and you don't care how it's being controlled.

[Speaker 2]
So basically Luxo is basically like the account abstraction chain. Because we know account abstraction is going to be huge. It's a huge narrative.

It's something that constantly comes up in a lot of talks with developers that I talk to. I'm not a developer by any means, but when I'm talking to them, and especially when I'm building a social five product, constantly account abstraction, account abstraction this, because we know the next wave of consumers are going to want to use blockchain without really knowing they're using blockchain or something like that. Okay.

Now you're making me kind of bullish on Luxo. I might got to go grab a bag here. That is actually really, really, really amazing.

And something, like I said, I've been talking about nonstop for the past eight months as I built this product.

[Speaker 1]
It is the ultimate of account abstraction chain. It has the first full on standardized smart contract account. Yeah.

I mean, account abstraction chain sounds a bit cheesy. I mean, I would call it the foundation for decentralized social. And yes, and whatever influencer thing you want to do on blockchain, Luxo is the place you want to build it on, because everything else will be just a fucking hack.

[Speaker 2]
I think we should. Yeah. I think I'm going to DM you.

I know you're hard to get over, but just get back to me whenever. We'll talk a bit about potentially bringing my product over there, because I've been working on it for a long time, but to pivot to potentially something like this, or even adding it, your guys' chain into it, how would it go with data from other chains though? So say I wanted to link an address to a profile on Luxo.

Is that possible or no, or is that something further down the line?

[Speaker 1]
I mean, you can write whatever the heck you want into a user's profile, as long as the user agrees to that. So, I mean, you can write whatever addresses, public keys from other chains in there and say, hey, these are my public keys I use in other chains. I mean, it functions even like you can even use it like an ENS, because you can write whatever you want in there.

The question is how this, obviously you don't write the private key into your public profile, because everybody can read that on chain.

[Speaker 3]
Yeah, for sure.

[Speaker 1]
You can write the public keys in case you want to link information, say this is my profile on Luxo, and I also, by the way, use the other addresses on other places. We built even these profiles in such a way that you can deploy them across chain at the same address. That is only possible right now for the people who created the profile with us and still kept the original browser extension, because we stored that data that allows you to cross-chain deploy it on exactly the same address again on another chain.

And then you technically can have it in multiple chains, but again, people need to keep in mind this is multiple chains, multiple isolated environments, and it's multiple smart contracts. So, obviously, even though it's the same address and maybe the same logic on both chains, it's two different smart contracts. So, you can update the profile picture on one, it wouldn't magically update on the other, obviously, because these things are not universally linked yet without another protocol that someone really needs to invent.

But you can attach. So, the thing is you want to use, you know, you ideally want to do most everything on Luxo, because that's where your universal profile lives. That's where you get your reputation.

That's where you have your interactions. That's where stuff is happening. So, you want to do it on the chain where your universal profile lives.

If you now have multiple universal profiles, even if they're the same address on multiple chains, it becomes a headache for users. And people do mistakes. They don't understand this whole multi-chain, cross-chain thing.

And as much as like DeFi wanted to simplify this by basically telling people, oh yeah, you can have this, you know, wallet everywhere, it works for private keys, right? Because a private key can be signing on multiple chains, but it doesn't work for a smart account so easily. And with private keys, you know, you have all the troubles that you have with private keys, right?

So, you can't really, you know, have information attached to it. You can't really, you know, manage it properly long-term. It's not something that you want to build a reputation on, because you could lose it at any point in time.

You know, there's no recovery ability, no social recovery, no nothing you can add to it. So, it's just a private key on the end. So, if you want to build anything socially, you want to pick a chain, like picking a country.

And, you know, then with Luxo, it's basically pretty straightforward to build anything. So, right now, there's only a browser extension. There's a mobile app that's in the works, but we're also looking into ways to bring in the browser extension to mobile.

But, yeah, if you build a dApp, and you want to run it on Luxo, it works out of the box, pretty much. If you want to connect to the browser, nothing changes. You just use the same, you do it the same way you do it with MetaMask.

Nothing changes for you as a dApp developer. It's the exact same thing, except that you now have the possibility to add information and read profile picture and, you know, do a lot more things.

[Speaker 2]
I mean, honestly, with, you know, the social vibe environment and how hot of a topic that is, I think it would be a great, like, there would be great synergy there to not only help Luxo, you know, or help us, but help Luxo as well. Like, a social vibe product is literally geared specifically for this, you know. I think you have a great opportunity there when it comes to social vibe products.

Now, somebody just needs to take the leap and build it there, you know.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah. I mean, it's, yeah, many, many things can now be built. It's, like you said, it's the account abstraction chain.

I think that's a bit too cheesy.

[Speaker 2]
Once that narrative takes off and people start to talk about account abstraction, you know, you don't necessarily have to call it that, but really, that's what essentially, you know, the fundamentalist of it is there to, you know, make sure that or make, allow people to use blockchain without really knowing that they're using blockchain. And we know that's going to onboard the normal people to use it because they all think blockchain is all, you know, hard to use and confusing when it's really, it's really not. But it is for the build.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, the thing is the foundations is now there. We developed it. It took five years to get there.

So it was a long, you know, a long journey to get this right. So building the foundation, the smart product standard and to get it right, that's the hardest task because that shit, you don't want to change, right? If once there's adoption around a certain thing, it needs to be done on the right thing.

Otherwise you have the same problem like Ethereum has now with ES20, where something that, you know, wasn't perfect became the number one. So now everybody's stuck on that. So you want to get it right, especially you want to get it right for an account.

Imagine you have an account that is like very limited in what it can do. And then five years down the road, you realize, fuck, we can't go back. You can't change it.

And everybody went this way. And now we're all stuck in like, you know, this system that is limited. So you need to get it right.

Hence why it took so long to get it right. So from now on, it's only about building the interfaces for it. It's only about building the tools to use it.

It's only the websites to show it and to integrate it. And you can now build everything on top of this. You can add social recovery.

You can even add passkey control. So you could even control your profile through a passkey from multiple devices, except that right now passkey, you know, cost 200,000 gas to verify on chain. But maybe in the future, there can be a precompile in Ethereum and then also in Luxor that allows you to like have your passkey keys to control your profile.

You can build anything you can think of on top of Universal Profiles. Anything. So.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, no, this is amazing. Okay, my final question is, you know, given, you know, your involvement in the creation of the ERC-725 and, you know, the beginning days of Ethereum, could you maybe elaborate on how the ERC-725 standard benefits both Luxor and Ethereum ecosystems, you know, especially in terms of like, you know, identity management and on-chain interaction and how you see there could be synergy there so that both chains can grow and get better and the space can get better.

[Speaker 1]
So Universal Profiles is a generic smart contract standard. That means it out of the box works on every EVM chain, except if you want to have all the user experience and the bells and whistles, you need a few more things. You need obviously a browser extension that we built and you need a transaction relay service if you want to have, you know, gasless experiences or very smooth onboarding.

And you need a few other things. But apart from that, the standard itself works. We are currently working on making Universal Profiles work also on Ethereum.

So that means we open our browser extension for Ethereum and potentially other chains as well. And we basically allowing then your profile that you already have that you can cross-chain deploy it on, you know, any of the other networks as well. On the end, ultimately, every chain will benefit from Universal Profiles or ERC-725 accounts, obviously, because they are a generic smart contract account, right?

That is just useful to have anywhere. I personally, the benefit you get being on Luxor is Luxor has not only invented this smart contract account, but we also made all the other standards work very smoothly and nicely together. Like they are better to work with, they are more flexible in what they can do, and they are very harmoniously working with Universal Profiles that creates a more decentralized on-chain experience.

That's why, you know, Luxor is the better place to build it on. It can be used in any other chain as well, but because you have the network effect on those chains and because they're using ERC-20 and all the other stuff, it doesn't flourish as much, let's say, as it does on Luxor. It's like, you know, if you have like a modern car and you go on a shitty road, then it doesn't drive so well, you know?

So you want to be on a great road too. So it's, you know, you want to have the whole package, not the half package, let's say. But you can have the smart contract account will totally benefit any chain as well once we open the browser extension up and once the mobile app is there and it opens up.

You know, what people right now see as a smart contract account is GnosisSafe, and GnosisSafe is a great multi-sig. It's the place to hold your stuff and it's really good for money holding, but it's not a smart contract account in that sense. It's a multi-sig, right?

You don't have a permission system on this. You cannot attach information to GnosisSafe. It's a multi-sig, right?

And you can actually put a multi-sig, you could put a GnosisSafe in front of a universal profile and now you can even use it as a company account or a company profile. Or you can put a voting contract in front of a universal profile and you have a DAO, you know? And now you have the benefit of not only having a DAO where you can vote, but you have a DAO that has a profile picture, a website that can be community governed, the information that's attached to this DAO profile, and you can literally manage that whole profile as a community in a decentralized fashion.

With even subgroups having separate permissions where they could share a portion of the money separately from what the people are voting on. It's not all possible because of the standards that are out now. But yeah, it needs some understanding and learning a little bit if you really want to do very sophisticated things.

But if you just want to use it as a wallet, it needs no learning at all. It just works out of the box like any EOA.

[Speaker 2]
Yeah, no, this is honestly amazing. I think I'm a Luxo Maxi now. It's really, obviously, for the more public side of the things, there's always going to be, you know, the use cases for the privacy and whatnot and that's fine.

But, you know, in this space with so many bad actors, I feel like these universal profiles are actually very important because, you know, it's just going to keep getting worse and worse unless there's something put in place to mitigate these bad actors. And I think that starts with something like universal profiles where there's actually, you know, some data to go off of inside of these profiles. And that's honestly what I'm building and I'm seeing, you know, the synergy here and, you know, potentially, you know, me and your team could jump on a call or something and figure out how we could get this over to Luxo.

But I'm super excited about it and going to dive a bit more into the tech with my developers. But yeah, I truly appreciate you jumping on a call and telling us about the past, you know, what you're working on now. And I really appreciate it.

I mean, if you want to take a couple more questions from anybody that wants to come up, I will, if you want to, just, you know, going to warn everybody that we want to be respectful here as well. But if you're all set, like, I'm good. I really appreciate everything that you've, you know, you kind of the knowledge that you've bestowed upon us here.

I appreciate it.

[Speaker 1]
Yeah, thanks for the opportunity to talk about a bit of the history. I mean, obviously, this would be right now, the situation that we are facing on Luxo is every time we talk to people and every time we explain it, you know, everybody realized, oh my God, this is the big shit. What we have right now, the biggest problem with that we are not having enough attention and not enough attention on like what it really is.

People, you know, that have heard about Luxo in the past, they kind of put it into a box of some fashion chain not relevant to them. We have literally built the most important, you know, foundation for blockchain going forward, probably. I mean, there's nothing comparable existing and now it needs to spread, you know, the knowledge and the idea needs to spread.

That's the most important aspect that needs to happen.

[Speaker 2]
I mean, honestly, that's where I see a social product coming in to onboard users. That is just, I mean, you could see what happened with BASE last year where BASE, I mean, first off, BASE is Coinbase, so it's going to attract users, period. But everybody saw the huge uptick in BASE once Frentech was added to it.

And you, from my understanding of, you know, the technology and everything that we talk about here is you're literally, your chain is literally geared perfectly for a social five product. If you could get a social five product on Luxo that, yeah, I mean, on boards users has some sort of airdrop campaign, brother, you'll see the people flock over there easily because first off, everybody loves free money, you know, free money, which is, you know, good and stuff. But if you build a good product, they come for the free money, but then they stay.

They stay because the product's good. You know, there's a lot of opportunities people are seeing from Luxo that, you know, oh, look at these universal profiles. I could actually follow them.

I could see what this guy's doing. Oh, he's a good actor. He's a bad actor.

Oh, he just shilled this, but then dumped it 15 minutes later. Like these are problems in the space that specifically Luxo can help, you know, mitigate.

[Speaker 1]
No, absolutely. I mean, there's maybe one thing I want to add to this is that it is a bit more, so we didn't just want to create one kind of app, you know, like a Forecaster or like a Frentech or whatever, where it just does one thing and it does this, and then they need to kind of add a bit more features here and there. We created the foundation for any of those things, any of those things, Forecaster, Frentech, anything.

If they would switch to universal profiles, they can like throw away 30% of their app systems and make it a lot easier for themselves and for everyone else, because that stuff plugs perfectly into a profile. You don't even need, like everybody reinvented the account because they didn't have an account, right? And then they tried to figure out how to connect the wallet of the user to it.

We have that built that you can now like literally have out of the box and you can just plug and care about what you actually want to build, which is your app, right? And not the account system. So the account system is not there, but it is built so much more on a ground level, hence why it allows everything, that now anybody can come and build like the follower system or whatever else on top of this.

And then, yes, and then it becomes not only one new app, it becomes basically a foundation for a decentralized social. Decentralized social means that anybody can come and help build the pieces of the social network. It's not one social network, it's these, the network is the social network itself and everybody can build an aspect of it and there can be many windows into the same social network and then you get all of what you said, you know, the transparency and all of this stuff.

And yeah, that's not possible because the account thing is, that's solved and that was the most important thing to solve. But when it comes to questions, I mean, happy to take a question. By the way, one thing also, Skima, who is here, a listener in there, he can happily help.

He's one of our SmartConnect devs. He can happily help with explaining to your team how stuff works, if you have a question. But really important is go to the docs.lux.tech. They have pretty much every knowledge there. We are constantly working on improving them to make them even more digestible, even more readable and simpler because obviously it's a lot to take in if you want to try everything. But most people don't even need to understand 90% of it, you know, what's in there because your apps just work out of the box and you can go feature by feature. Whatever you need, you can go figure out how would I do this in those profiles and you will find a way.

So you don't need to learn all the standards and then go build. You can literally go step by step and you literally need to know nothing to just get started. Connecting your profile is connecting the same as like a wallet and you can grow from there and it's fairly simple.

[Speaker 2]
Amazing, man. I really learned a lot. I appreciate it.

I will be in contact if that's okay with you just to maybe bounce some ideas around. But yeah, I really appreciate this. I would love to get another spaces where it's you and potentially Alexandre if you would be willing to do that.

Maybe in a couple weeks down the line, a month or so, give a little break here. But yeah, no, I appreciate it. I don't see any hands up if anybody wanted to ask a question.

But yeah, thank you very much. I had a great time talking to you and we'll be in touch, man. I appreciate what you're doing for the space and what you've done for the space.

Yeah, thank you so much as well.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, happy to join a call with Alexandre Afsa. I haven't been in a public Twitter space, I guess, ever. So, it would be definitely fun.

If anybody has a question, then feel free. By the way, maybe one other thing, you talked about airdrops and stuff. We're working on an airdrop bar.

So, basically, a tool that anybody can just come and like scan all the news profiles out there, give it certain metrics, what they want to see, hey, has it interacted with this token or has interacted with this protocol or was created from then to then or has so and so many transactions made or gas used and then basically get the list of the profiles out and drop them whatever you like. So, basically, it's a generic tool for anybody to create, to airdrop stuff, which welcome to the world of spamming, I guess.

[Speaker 2]
I mean, it's an attention economy, like you're saying, and you got to grab people's attention. And unfortunately, not unfortunately, but a little unfortunately that money speaks all. So, yeah.

[Speaker 1]
I mean, the airdrop tool would be fun. We also will probably use it ourselves. I mean, this is really, we build it for ourselves, but it's very generically usable for other people.

And we have already a lot of NFT projects on Luxor. We have a lot of meme coins on Luxor. There's already quite a social community.

And the cool thing is, if you go to universalprofile.cloud, you can see the profiles, you can see the activity, you can see what's happening on chain, you can see what people collect. It's already a social space and a social chain by default, because everybody has a profile. Hence why it's the account obstruction chain, right?

[Speaker 2]
You know, you could take that. I'm not trademarking none. Yeah, this was great.

I appreciate you. And we'll be in touch. I got some ideas for Luxor.

We'll bounce them back off each other. So if nobody has any questions, which it doesn't look like it, I'm going to close it up. Thanks, everybody, for coming.

Thanks, Fabian. Have a good day, guys.

[Speaker 1]
Thank you, guys. Thanks, everybody.